<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<h1>FANTÔMAS</h1>
<h2>PIERRE SOUVESTRE</h2>
<h3>AND</h3>
<h2>MARCEL ALLAIN</h2>
<h3><i>Translated from the original French by</i><br/>
<span class="smcap2">Cranstoun Metcalfe</span></h3>
<h3><i>Introduction to the Dover Edition by</i><br/>
<span class="smcap2">Robin Walz</span></h3>
<h4>DOVER PUBLICATIONS, INC.<br/>
Mineola, New York</h4>
<p class="center"><i>Bibliographical Note</i></p>
<p class="center">This Dover edition, first published in 2006, is an unabridged republication of the<br/>
work first published by Brentano's Publishers Inc., New York, in 1915.</p>
<p class="center"><i>International Standard Book Number: 0-486-44971-8</i></p>
<p class="frontend">
Manufactured in the United States of America<br/>
Dover Publications, Inc., 31 East 2nd Street, Mineola, N.Y. 11501</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_iii">[Pg iii]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">Contents</span></h2>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_iv">[Pg iv]</a></span></p>
<div class="center">
<table style="border-spacing: 0px;padding: 4px;border-width: 0px;" data-summary="toc">
<tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left;"/><td style="text-align: left;">Introduction to the Dover Edition</td><td style="text-align: right;"><span class="smcap">v</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;"><span class="smcap">chapter</span></td><td style="text-align: left;"/><td style="text-align: right;"><span class="smcap">page</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">I.</td><td style="text-align: left;">The Genius of Crime</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_1" class="pginternal">1</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">II.</td><td style="text-align: left;">A Tragic Dawn</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_12" class="pginternal">12</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">III.</td><td style="text-align: left;">The Hunt for the Man</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_26" class="pginternal">26</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">IV.</td><td style="text-align: left;">"No! I am not Mad!"</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_34" class="pginternal">34</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">V.</td><td style="text-align: left;">"Arrest Me!"</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_45" class="pginternal">45</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">VI.</td><td style="text-align: left;">"Fantômas, it is Death!"</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_52" class="pginternal">52</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">VII.</td><td style="text-align: left;">The Criminal Investigation Department</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_68" class="pginternal">68</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">VIII.</td><td style="text-align: left;">A Dreadful Confession</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_82" class="pginternal">82</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">IX.</td><td style="text-align: left;">All for Honour</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_92" class="pginternal">92</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">X.</td><td style="text-align: left;">Princess Sonia's Bath</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_104" class="pginternal">104</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XI.</td><td style="text-align: left;">Magistrate and Detective</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_117" class="pginternal">117</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XII.</td><td style="text-align: left;">A Knock-out Blow</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_125" class="pginternal">125</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XIII.</td><td style="text-align: left;">Thérèse's Future</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_133" class="pginternal">133</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XIV.</td><td style="text-align: left;">Mademoiselle Jeanne</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_140" class="pginternal">140</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XV.</td><td style="text-align: left;">The Mad Woman's Plot</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_146" class="pginternal">146</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XVI.</td><td style="text-align: left;">Among the Market Porters</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_156" class="pginternal">156</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XVII.</td><td style="text-align: left;">At the Saint-Anthony's Pig</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_163" class="pginternal">163</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XVIII.</td><td style="text-align: left;">A Prisoner and a Witness</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_174" class="pginternal">174</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XIX.</td><td style="text-align: left;">Jérôme Fandor</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_184" class="pginternal">184</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XX.</td><td style="text-align: left;">A Cup of Tea</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_190" class="pginternal">190</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XXI.</td><td style="text-align: left;">Lord Beltham's Murderer</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_196" class="pginternal">196</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XXII.</td><td style="text-align: left;">The Scrap of Paper</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_205" class="pginternal">205</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XXIII.</td><td style="text-align: left;">The Wreck of the "Lancaster"</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_210" class="pginternal">210</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XXIV.</td><td style="text-align: left;">Under Lock and Key</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_216" class="pginternal">216</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XXV.</td><td style="text-align: left;">An Unexpected Accomplice</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_223" class="pginternal">223</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XXVI.</td><td style="text-align: left;">A Mysterious Crime</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_228" class="pginternal">228</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XXVII.</td><td style="text-align: left;">Three Surprising Incidents</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_237" class="pginternal">237</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XXVIII.</td><td style="text-align: left;">The Court of Assize</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_247" class="pginternal">247</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XXIX.</td><td style="text-align: left;">Verdict and Sentence</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_255" class="pginternal">255</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XXX.</td><td style="text-align: left;">An Assignation</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_265" class="pginternal">265</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XXXI.</td><td style="text-align: left;">Fell Treachery</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_276" class="pginternal">276</a></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: right;">XXXII.</td><td style="text-align: left;">On the Scaffold</td><td style="text-align: right;"><a href="#Page_288" class="pginternal">288</a></td></tr>
</tbody></table></div>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_1">[1]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">I. The Genius of Crime</span></h2>
<p>"Fantômas."</p>
<p>"What did you say?"</p>
<p>"I said: Fantômas."</p>
<p>"And what does that mean?"</p>
<p>"Nothing.... Everything!"</p>
<p>"But what is it?"</p>
<p>"Nobody.... And yet, yes, it is somebody!"</p>
<p>"And what does the somebody do?"</p>
<p>"Spreads terror!"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Dinner was just over, and the company were moving into the
drawing-room.</p>
<p>Hurrying to the fireplace, the Marquise de Langrune took a
large log from a basket and flung it on to the glowing embers on
the hearth; the log crackled and shed a brilliant light over the
whole room; the guests of the Marquise instinctively drew near
to the fire.</p>
<p>During the ten consecutive months she spent every year at
her château of Beaulieu, on the outskirts of Corrèze, that picturesque
district bounded by the Dordogne, it had been the
immemorial custom of the Marquise de Langrune to entertain
a few of her personal friends in the neighbourhood to dinner
every Wednesday, thereby obtaining a little pleasant relief from
her loneliness and keeping up some contact with the world.</p>
<p>On this particular winter evening the good lady's guests included
several habitués: President Bonnet, a retired magistrate
who had withdrawn to his small property at Saint-Jaury, in the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_2">[2]</a></span>
suburbs of Brives, and the Abbé Sicot, who was the parish priest.
A more occasional friend was also there, the Baronne de Vibray,
a young and wealthy widow, a typical woman of the world who
spent the greater part of her life either in motoring, or in the
most exclusive drawing-rooms of Paris, or at the most fashionable
watering-places. But when the Baronne de Vibray put herself
out to grass, as she racily phrased it, and spent a few weeks
at Querelles, her estate close to the château of Beaulieu, nothing
pleased her better than to take her place again in the delightful
company of the Marquise de Langrune and her friends.</p>
<p>Finally, youth was represented by Charles Rambert, who had
arrived at the château a couple of days before, a charming lad of
about eighteen who was treated with warm affection by the
Marquise and by Thérèse Auvernois, the granddaughter of the
Marquise, with whom since her parents' death she had lived as
a daughter.</p>
<p>The odd and even mysterious words spoken by President
Bonnet as they were leaving the table, and the personality of this
Fantômas about which he had said nothing definite in spite of
all the questions put to him, had excited the curiosity of the
company, and while Thérèse Auvernois was gracefully dispensing
the coffee to her grandmother's guests the questions were
renewed with greater insistence. Crowding round the fire, for
the evening was very cold, Mme. de Langrune's friends showered
fresh questions upon the old magistrate, who secretly enjoyed
the interest he had inspired. He cast a solemn eye upon
the circle of his audience and prolonged his silence, the more to
capture their attention. At length he began to speak.</p>
<p>"Statistics tell us, ladies, that of all the deaths that are registered
every day quite a third are due to crime. You are no doubt
aware that the police discover about half of the crimes that are
committed, and that barely half meet with the penalty of justice.
This explains how it is that so many mysteries are never cleared
up, and why there are so many mistakes and inconsistencies in
judicial investigations."</p>
<p>"What is the conclusion you wish to draw?" the Marquise de
Langrune enquired with interest.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_3">[3]</a></span></p>
<p>"This," the magistrate proceeded: "although many crimes
pass unsuspected it is none the less obvious that they have been
committed; now while some of them are due to ordinary criminals,
others are the work of enigmatical beings who are difficult
to trace and too clever or intelligent to let themselves be caught.
History is full of stories of such mysterious characters, the Iron
Mask, for instance, and Cagliostro. In every age there have been
bands of dangerous creatures, led by such men as Cartouche
and Vidocq and Rocambole. Now why should we suppose that
in our time no one exists who emulates the deeds of those
mighty criminals?"</p>
<p>The Abbé Sicot raised a gentle voice from the depths of a
comfortable arm-chair wherein he was peacefully digesting his
dinner.</p>
<p>"The police do their work better in our time than ever they
did before."</p>
<p>"That is perfectly true," the president admitted, "but their
work is also more difficult than ever it was before. Criminals
who operate in the grand manner have all sorts of things at their
disposal nowadays. Science has done much for modern
progress, but unfortunately it can be of invaluable assistance to
criminals at times; the hosts of evil have the telegraph and the
motor-car at their disposal just as authority has, and some day
they will make use of the aeroplane."</p>
<p>Young Charles Rambert had been listening to the president's
dissertation with the utmost interest and now broke in, with a
voice that quivered slightly.</p>
<p>"You were talking about Fantômas just now, sir——"</p>
<p>The president cast a cryptic look at the lad and did not reply
directly to him.</p>
<p>"That is what I am coming to, for, of course, you have understood
me, ladies. In these days we have been distressed by a
steady access of criminality, and among the assets we shall
henceforth have to count a mysterious and most dangerous
creature, to whom the baffled authorities and public rumour
generally have for some time now given the name of Fantômas.
It is impossible to say exactly or to know precisely who<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_4">[4]</a></span>
Fantômas is. He often assumes the form and personality of
some definite and even well-known individual; sometimes he assumes
the forms of two human beings at one and the same time.
Sometimes he works alone, sometimes with accomplices; sometimes
he can be identified as such and such a person, but no one
has ever yet arrived at knowing Fantômas himself. That he is a
living person is certain and undeniable, yet he is impossible to
catch or to identify. He is nowhere and everywhere at once, his
shadow hovers above the strangest mysteries, and his traces are
found near the most inexplicable crimes, and yet——"</p>
<p>"You are frightening us!" exclaimed the Baronne de Vibray
with a little forced laugh that did not ring true, and the
Marquise de Langrune, who for the past few minutes had been
uneasy at the idea of the children listening to the conversation,
cast about in her mind for an occupation more suited to their
age. The interruption gave her an opportunity, and she turned
to Charles Rambert and Thérèse.</p>
<p>"You must find it very dull here with all of us grown-up people,
dears, so run away now. Thérèse," she added with a smile to
her granddaughter who had risen obediently, "there is a splendid
new puzzle in the library; you ought to try it with Charles."</p>
<p>The young fellow realised that he must comply with the desire
of the Marquise, although the conversation interested him
intensely; but he was too well bred to betray his thoughts, and
the next moment he was in the adjoining room, sitting opposite
the girl, and deep in the intricacies of the latest fashionable
game.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>The Baronne de Vibray brought the conversation back to the
subject of Fantômas.</p>
<p>"What connection is there, President, between this uncanny
creature and the disappearance of Lord Beltham, of which we
were talking at dinner?"</p>
<p>"I should certainly have agreed with you and thought there
was none," the old magistrate replied, "if Lord Beltham's disappearance
had been unattended by any mysterious circumstance.
But there is one point that deserves your attention: the newspa<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_5">[5]</a></span>per
from which I read an extract just now, <i>La Capitale</i>, draws attention
to it and regards it as being important. It is said that
when Lady Beltham began to be uneasy about her husband's absence,
on the morning of the day following his disappearance,
she remembered noticing just as he was going out that he was
reading a particular letter, the peculiar, square shape of which
surprised her. She had also noticed that the handwriting of the
letter was very heavy and black. Now, she found the letter in
question upon her husband's desk, but the whole of the writing
had disappeared, and it was only the most minute examination
that resulted in the discovery of a few almost imperceptible
stains which proved that it really was the identical document
that had been in her husband's hands. Lady Beltham would not
have thought very much about it, if it had not occurred to the
editor of <i>La Capitale</i> to interview detective Juve about it, the famous
Inspector of the Criminal Investigation Department, you
know, who has brought so many notorious criminals to justice.
Now M. Juve manifested the greatest excitement over the discovery
and the nature of this document; and he did not attempt
to hide from his interviewer his belief that the strange nature of
this unusual epistle was proof of the intervention of Fantômas.
You very likely know that Juve has made it his special business
to follow up Fantômas; he has sworn that he will take him, and
he is after him body and soul. Let us hope he will succeed! But
it is no good pretending that Juve's job is not as difficult a one as
can be imagined.</p>
<p>"However, it is a fair inference that when Juve spoke as he did
to the representative of <i>La Capitale</i>, he did not think he was
going too far when he declared that a crime lay behind the disappearance
of Lord Beltham, and that perhaps the crime must
be laid at Fantômas' door; and we can only hope that at some not
distant date, justice will not only throw full light upon this mysterious
affair, but also rid us for ever of this terrifying criminal!"</p>
<p>President Bonnet had convinced his audience completely,
and his closing words cast a chill upon them all.</p>
<p>The Marquise de Langrune deemed it time to create a
diversion.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_6">[6]</a></span></p>
<p>"Who are these people, Lord and Lady Beltham?" she
enquired.</p>
<p>"Oh, my dear!" the Baronne de Vibray answered, "it is perfectly
obvious that you lead the life of a hermit in this remote
country home of yours, and that echoes from the world of Paris
do not reach you often! Lord and Lady Beltham are among the
best known and most popular people in society. He was formerly
attached to the English Embassy, but left Paris to fight in
the Transvaal, and his wife went with him and showed magnificent
courage and compassion in charge of the ambulance and
hospital work. They then went back to London, and a couple of
years ago they settled once more in Paris. They lived, and still
live, in the boulevard Inkermann at Neuilly-sur-Seine, in a delightful
house where they entertain a great deal. I have often
been one of Lady Beltham's guests; she is a most fascinating
woman, distinguished, tall, fair, and endowed with the charm
that is peculiar to the women of the North. I am very distressed
at the trouble that is hanging over her."</p>
<p>"Well," said the Marquise de Langrune conclusively, "I mean
to believe that the gloomy prognostications of our friend the
president will not be justified by the event."</p>
<p>"Amen!" murmured the Abbé mechanically, roused from his
gentle slumber by the closing words of the Marquise.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>The clock chimed ten, and her duties as hostess did not make
the Marquise forgetful of her duties as grandmother.</p>
<p>"Thérèse," she called, "it is your bed-time. It is very late,
darling."</p>
<p>The child obediently left her game, said good night to the
Baronne de Vibray and President Bonnet, and last of all to the
old priest, who gave her a paternal embrace.</p>
<p>"Shall I see you at the seven o'clock mass, Thérèse?" he
asked.</p>
<p>The child turned to the Marquise.</p>
<p>"Will you let me accompany Charles to the station to-morrow
morning? I will go to the eight o'clock mass on my way back."</p>
<p>The Marquise looked at Charles Rambert.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_7">[7]</a></span></p>
<p>"Your father really is coming by the train that reaches
Verrières at 6.55?" and when he assented she hesitated a moment
before replying to Thérèse. "I think, dear, it would be better
to let our young friend go alone to meet his father."</p>
<p>But Charles Rambert put in his plea.</p>
<p>"Oh, I am sure my father would be delighted to see Thérèse
with me when he gets out of the train."</p>
<p>"Very well, then," the kind old lady said; "arrange it as you
please. But, Thérèse, before you go upstairs, tell our good steward,
Dollon, to give orders for the carriage to be ready by six
o'clock. It is a long way to the station."</p>
<p>Thérèse promised, and the two young people left the
drawing-room.</p>
<p>"A pretty couple," remarked the Baronne de Vibray, adding
with a characteristic touch of malice, "you mean to make a
match between them some day, Marquise?"</p>
<p>The old lady threw up her hands protesting.</p>
<p>"What an idea! Why, Thérèse is not fifteen yet."</p>
<p>"Who is this Charles Rambert?" the Abbé asked. "I just
caught sight of him the day before yesterday with Dollon, and I
puzzled my brains wondering who he could be."</p>
<p>"I am not surprised," the Marquise laughed, "not surprised
that you did not succeed in finding out, for you do not know
him. But you may perhaps have heard me mention a M. Etienne
Rambert, an old friend of mine, with whom I had many a dance
in the long ago. I had lost sight of him completely until about
two years ago, when I met him at a charity function in Paris. The
poor man has had a rather chequered life; twenty years ago he
married a woman who was perfectly charming, but who is, I believe,
very ill with a distressing malady: I am not even sure that
she is not insane. Quite lately Etienne Rambert has been compelled
to send her to an asylum."</p>
<p>"That does not tell us how his son comes to be your guest,"
President Bonnet urged.</p>
<p>"It is very simple: Etienne Rambert is an energetic man who
is always moving about. Although he is quite sixty he still occupies
himself with some rubber plantations he possesses in<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_8">[8]</a></span>
Colombia, and he often goes to America: he thinks no more of
the voyage than we do of a trip to Paris. Well, just recently
young Charles Rambert was leaving the <i>pension</i> in Hamburg
where he had been living in order to perfect his German; I knew
from his father's letters that Mme. Rambert was about to be put
away, and that Etienne Rambert was obliged to be absent, so I
offered to receive Charles here until his father should return to
Paris. Charles came the day before yesterday, and that is the
whole story."</p>
<p>"And M. Etienne Rambert joins him here to-morrow?" said
the Abbé.</p>
<p>"That is so——"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>The Marquise de Langrune would have given other information
about her young friend had he not come into the room just
then. He was an attractive lad with refined and distinguished
features, clear, intelligent eyes, and graceful figure. The other
guests were silent, and Charles Rambert approached them with
the slight awkwardness of youth. He went up to President
Bonnet and plucked up sudden courage.</p>
<p>"And what then, sir?" he asked in a low tone.</p>
<p>"I don't understand, my boy," said the magistrate.</p>
<p>"Oh!" said Charles Rambert, "have you finished talking about
Fantômas? It was so amusing!"</p>
<p>"For my part," the president answered dryly, "I do not find
these stories about criminals 'amusing.'"</p>
<p>But the lad did not detect the shade of reproach in the words.</p>
<p>"But still it is very odd, very extraordinary that such mysterious
characters as Fantômas can exist nowadays. Is it really possible
that a single man can commit such a number of crimes,
and that any human being can escape discovery, as they say
Fantômas can, and be able to foil the cleverest devices of the
police? I think it is——"</p>
<p>The president's manner grew steadily more chilly as the boy's
curiosity waxed more enthusiastic, and he interrupted curtly.</p>
<p>"I fail to understand your attitude, young man. You appear to
be hypnotised, fascinated. You speak of Fantômas as if he were<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_9">[9]</a></span>
something interesting. It is out of place, to put it mildly," and he
turned to the Abbé Sicot. "There, sir, that is the result of this
modern education and the state of mind produced in the
younger generation by the newspaper press and even by literature.
Criminals are given haloes and proclaimed from the
housetops. It is astounding!"</p>
<p>But Charles Rambert was not the least impressed.</p>
<p>"But it is life, sir; it is history, it is the real thing!" he insisted.
"Why, you yourself, in just a few words, have thrown an atmosphere
round this Fantômas which makes him absolutely fascinating!
I would give anything to have known Vidocq and
Cartouche and Rocambole, and to have seen them at close quarters.
Those were men!"</p>
<p>President Bonnet contemplated the young man in astonishment;
his eyes flashed lightning at him and he burst out:</p>
<p>"You are mad, boy, absolutely mad! Vidocq—Rocambole! You
mix up legend and history, bracket murderers with detectives,
and make no distinction between right and wrong! You would
not hesitate to set the heroes of crime and the heroes of law and
order on one and the same pedestal!"</p>
<p>"You have said the word, sir," Charles Rambert exclaimed:
"they all are heroes. But, better still, Fantômas——"</p>
<p>The lad's outburst was so vehement and spontaneous and sincere,
that it provoked unanimous indignation among his hearers.
Even the indulgent Marquise de Langrune ceased to smile.
Charles Rambert perceived that he had gone too far, and
stopped abruptly.</p>
<p>"I beg your pardon, sir," he murmured. "I spoke without
thinking; please forgive me."</p>
<p>He raised his eyes and looked at President Bonnet, blushing
to the tips of his ears and looking so abashed that the magistrate,
who was a kind-hearted man at bottom, tried to reassure him.</p>
<p>"Your imagination is much too lively, young man, much too
lively. But you will grow out of that. Come, come: that's all right;
lads of your age do talk without knowledge."</p>
<p>It was very late now, and a few minutes after this incident the
guests of the Marquise de Langrune took their departure.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_10">[10]</a></span></p>
<p>Charles Rambert accompanied the Marquise to the door of
her own private rooms, and was about to bid her a respectful
good night before going on to his bedroom, which adjoined
hers, when she asked him to follow her.</p>
<p>"Come in and get the book I promised you, Charles. It should
be on my writing-table." She glanced at that piece of furniture
as she entered the room, and went on, "Or in it, perhaps; I may
have locked it away."</p>
<p>"I don't want to give you any trouble," he protested, but the
Marquise insisted.</p>
<p>"Put your light down on that table," she said. "Besides, I have
got to open my desk, for I must look at the lottery tickets I gave
to Thérèse a few weeks ago." She pushed back the roll top of her
Empire desk and looked up at the young fellow. "It would be a
piece of good luck if my little Thérèse won the first prize, eh,
Charles? A million francs! That would be worth winning?"</p>
<p>"Rather!" said Charles Rambert with a smile.</p>
<p>The Marquise found the book she was searching for and gave
it to the lad with one hand while with the other she smoothed
out several variegated papers.</p>
<p>"These are my tickets," she said, and then broke off. "How
stupid of me! I have not kept the number of the winning ticket
that was advertised in <i>La Capitale</i>."</p>
<p>Charles Rambert immediately offered to go downstairs again
to fetch the newspaper, but the Marquise would not let him.</p>
<p>"It is no good, my dear boy; it is not there now. You know—or
rather you don't know—that the Abbé takes away all the
week's newspapers every Wednesday night in order to read all
the political articles." The old lady turned away from her writing-table,
which she left wide open, conducted the young man
to the door, and held out a friendly hand. "It is to-morrow morning
already!" she said. "So now good night, dear Charles!"</p>
<p>In his own room, with the lights extinguished and the curtains
closed, Charles Rambert lay wide awake, a prey to strange excitement.
He turned and tossed in his bed nervously. In vain did
he try to banish from his mind the words spoken during the
evening by President Bonnet. In imagination Charles Rambert<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_11">[11]</a></span>
saw all manner of sinister and dramatic scenes, crimes and murders:
hugely interested, intensely curious, craving for knowledge,
he was ever trying to concoct plots and unravel mysteries.
If for an instant he dozed off, the image of Fantômas took shape
in his mind, but never twice the same: sometimes he saw a
colossal figure with bestial face and muscular shoulders; sometimes
a wan, thin creature, with strange and piercing eyes;
sometimes a vague form, a phantom—Fantômas!</p>
<p>Charles Rambert slept, and woke, and dozed again. In the silence
of the night he thought he heard creakings and heavy
sounds. Then suddenly he felt a breath pass over his face—and
again nothing! And suddenly again strange sounds were buzzing
in his ears.</p>
<p>Bathed in cold sweat Charles Rambert started and sat upright
in bed, every muscle tense, listening with all his ears. Was he
dreaming, or had he really waked up? He did not know. And
still, still he had a consciousness of Fantômas—of mystery—of
Fantômas!</p>
<p>Charles Rambert heard the clock strike four.</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_12">[12]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">II. A Tragic Dawn</span></h2>
<p>As his cab turned by the end of the Pont Royal towards the
Gare d'Orsay, M. Etienne Rambert looked at his watch and
found, as he had anticipated, that he had a good quarter of an
hour before the train that he intended to take was due to start.
He called a porter, and gave him the heavy valise and the bundle
of rugs that formed the whole of his hand baggage.</p>
<p>"Where is the office for forwarding luggage, my man?" he
enquired.</p>
<p>The porter led him through the famous panelled hall of the
Gare d'Orsay, and M. Etienne Rambert satisfied himself that his
trunks had been properly registered for Verrières, the station at
which he had to alight for the château of Beaulieu.</p>
<p>Still attended by the porter, who had conceived a respectful
admiration for him in consequence of the authoritative tone in
which he demanded information from the various railway servants,
and who scented a probable munificent tip, M. Etienne
Rambert proceeded to the booking-office and took a first-class
ticket. He spent a few minutes more at the book-stall where he
selected an imposing collection of illustrated papers, and then,
his final preparations completed, he turned once more to the
porter.</p>
<p>"The Luchon train," he said; "where is it?" and as the man
only made a vague gesture and growled something wholly indistinct,
he added: "Lead the way, and I will follow."</p>
<p>It was now just half-past eight, and the station showed all the
animation inseparable from the departure of main-line trains.
M. Etienne Rambert hurried onwards, and reaching the plat<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_13">[13]</a></span>form
from which all the lines begin, was stayed by the porter
who was laden with his baggage.</p>
<p>"You want the express, sir?"</p>
<p>"No, the slow train, my man."</p>
<p>The porter showed some surprise, but made no remark.</p>
<p>"Do you like the front or the back of the train?"</p>
<p>"The back by choice."</p>
<p>"First-class, isn't it?"</p>
<p>"Yes, first-class."</p>
<p>The porter, who had stopped a moment, picked up the heavy
valise again.</p>
<p>"Then there isn't any choice. There are only two first-class
carriages on the slow train, and they are both in the middle."</p>
<p>"They are corridor carriages, I suppose?" said Etienne
Rambert.</p>
<p>"Yes, sir; there are hardly any others on the main-line trains,
especially first-class."</p>
<p>In the ever-increasing crowd Etienne Rambert had some difficulty
in following the porter. The Gare d'Orsay has little or
none of the attractiveness of the other stations, which cannot fail
to have a certain fascination for any imaginative person, who
thinks of the mystery attaching to all those iron rails reaching
out into the distance of countries unknown to him. It is less
noisy than the others also, for between Austerlitz and Orsay the
traction is entirely electric. And further, there is no clearly defined
separation between the main and the suburban lines.</p>
<p>On the right of the platform was the train which was to take
Etienne Rambert beyond Brives to Verrières, the slow train to
Luchon; and on the left of the same platform was another train
for Juvisy and all the small stations in the suburbs of Paris.</p>
<p>Very few people were making for the train to Luchon; but a
large crowd was pressing into the suburban train.</p>
<p>The porter who was piloting M. Etienne Rambert, set the
baggage he was carrying down on the footboard of a first-class
carriage.</p>
<p>"There is no one for the slow train yet, sir; if you like to get in
first you can choose your own compartment."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_14">[14]</a></span></p>
<p>M. Etienne Rambert acted on the suggestion, but he had
hardly set foot in the corridor before the guard, also scenting a
generous tip, came to offer his services.</p>
<p>"It really is the 8.50 you want, sir?" was his first enquiry. "You
are sure you are not making a mistake?"</p>
<p>"No," Etienne Rambert replied. "Why?"</p>
<p>"A great many first-class passengers do make a mistake," the
man explained, "and confuse the 8.50 with the 8.45 express."</p>
<p>As he spoke the guard took the baggage from the porter who
had remained on the platform, and the porter, after being generously
remunerated for his trouble by M. Rambert, hurried
away to look for other travellers.</p>
<p>"The 8.45 is the express, isn't it?" M. Rambert enquired.</p>
<p>"Yes," the guard answered; "it runs right through without
stopping at all the small stations as this train does. It goes in
front of this one and gets to Luchon three hours earlier. There
it is on the side there," and he pointed through the window in
the door on the far side to another train on the next rails, in
which a number of travellers were already taking their seats. "If
you prefer to go by that one, sir," he went on, "there is still time
for you to change; you are entitled to take your choice since you
have a first-class ticket."</p>
<p>But Etienne Rambert, after a moment's consideration, declined
the suggestion.</p>
<p>"No: I would rather go by the slow train. If I take the express
I should have to get out at Brives, and then I should be twelve
or thirteen miles from Saint-Jaury, which is my destination;
whereas the slow train stops at Verrières, where, by the way,
I have already telegraphed to say I shall arrive to-morrow
morning."</p>
<p>He walked a little way along the corridor, assuring himself
that the various compartments were still quite empty, and then
turned to the guard.</p>
<p>"Look here, my man," he said, "I am awfully tired, and I
mean to get some sleep to-night; consequently I should like to
be alone. Now where shall I be most quiet and undisturbed?"</p>
<p>The man understood. M. Etienne Rambert's enquiry about<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_15">[15]</a></span>
the place where he would be most quiet, was an implicit
promise of a handsome tip if nobody did disturb him.</p>
<p>"If you like to settle yourself here, sir," the man answered,
"you can draw down the blinds at once, and I dare say I shall be
able to find room for any other passengers somewhere else."</p>
<p>"Good," said M. Rambert, moving towards the compartment
indicated. "I will smoke a cigar until the train starts, and immediately
afterwards I will settle down to sleep. By the way, my
man, since you seem so obliging, I wish you would undertake to
call me to-morrow morning in time for me to get out at
Verrières. I am desperately sleepy and I am quite capable of not
waking up."</p>
<p>The guard touched his cap.</p>
<p>"You can be perfectly easy, sir, and sleep without the least anxiety.
I won't fail."</p>
<p>"Very well."</p>
<p>When his baggage had been stowed away, and his rugs spread
out to make the seat more comfortable still, M. Etienne
Rambert repeated his appeal, for he was an old traveller and
knew that it does not do to rely too much upon the promises of
chance attendants.</p>
<p>"I can rely upon you, can't I? I may sleep as sound as I like,
and you will wake me at Verrières?" And the more to assure
himself that the guard would execute his orders he slipped a
franc into his hand.</p>
<p>When he was left alone, M. Rambert continued his preparations
for the night. He carefully drew down the blinds over the
door and over the windows of the compartment that gave on to
the corridor, and also lowered the shade over the electric light,
and then, in order to enjoy the last puffs at his cigar in peace, he
opened the window over the other door and leant his elbows on
it, watching the final preparations being made by the travellers
by the express on the other line.</p>
<p>The departure of a train is always a picturesque sight, and M.
Rambert leant forward inquisitively to note how the passengers
had installed themselves in the two compartments which he
could see from his coign of vantage.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_16">[16]</a></span></p>
<p>There were not many people in the train. As a matter of fact
the Brives and Luchon line is not much used at this time of year.
If the number of passengers in the express were any criterion
Etienne Rambert might reasonably expect that he would be the
only one in the slow train. But there was not much time for observations
and reflections of this kind. On the platform for the
express, which he got a glimpse of through the compartments,
people were hurrying up their farewells. The passengers had got
into their carriages, and the friends who had come to see them
off were standing alone upon the platform. There was the sound
of safety locks being fastened by porters, and the noise of trollies
being wheeled along bearing articles for sale.</p>
<p>"Pillows! Rugs! Sweets! Papers!"</p>
<p>Then came the whistle of the guard, the shriller scream from
the electric engine, and then, slowly at first but steadily, more
rapidly as the engine got up speed, the express moved along the
platform and plunged into the tunnel on the way to Austerlitz.</p>
<p>Meanwhile the guard of the slow train was doing wonders.
Shamelessly resolved to assure perfect quiet to "his" passenger,
he managed, without unduly compromising himself but yet
without leaving any doubt about it in any mind, to insinuate discreetly
that M. Rambert's carriage was reserved, so that that
gentleman might count upon an entirely undisturbed night.</p>
<p>A few minutes after the express had gone, the slow train drew
out in its turn, and disappeared into the darkness of the underground
tunnel.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>At the château of Beaulieu young Charles Rambert was just
finishing dressing when a gentle tap sounded on the door of his
room.</p>
<p>"It is a quarter to five, Charles. Get up at once!"</p>
<p>"I am awake already, Thérèse," Charles Rambert answered
with some pride. "I shall be ready in two minutes."</p>
<p>"What? up already?" the girl exclaimed from the other side of
the door. "Marvellous! I congratulate you. I'm ready too; I will
wait for you in the dining-room. Come down as soon as you are
dressed."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_17">[17]</a></span></p>
<p>"All right!" the young man answered.</p>
<p>He wasted no time over his toilette, the more so because it
was none too warm in his room, for at this early hour it was still
quite dark; and then taking his light in one hand he opened his
door carefully so as to make no noise, tip-toed along the landing,
and went down the staircase to join Thérèse in the dining-room.
The girl was an accomplished housekeeper already, and while
waiting for the young fellow she had got a scratch meal together.</p>
<p>"Let us have breakfast quickly," she suggested; "it isn't snowing
this morning, and if you like we might walk to the station.
We have plenty of time, and it will do us good to have a walk."</p>
<p>"It will warm us up anyhow," Charles Rambert replied; he
was only half-awake, but he sat beside Thérèse, and did justice
to the preparations she had made.</p>
<p>"Do you know that it is very wonderful of you to get up so
punctually?" Mme. de Langrune's granddaughter remarked.
"How did you manage it? Last night you were afraid you would
sleep on as usual."</p>
<p>"It was not much trouble for me to wake up," Charles
Rambert answered. "I hardly closed an eye all night."</p>
<p>"But I promised to come and knock at your door myself, so
you might have slept without any anxiety."</p>
<p>"That's so, but to tell you the truth, Thérèse, I was regularly
upset and excited by the thought of papa arriving this morning."</p>
<p>They had both finished breakfast, and Thérèse got up.</p>
<p>"Shall we start?" she asked.</p>
<p>"Yes."</p>
<p>Thérèse opened the hall door, and the two young people went
down the flight of steps leading to the garden. The girl had
thrown a big cloak over her shoulders, and she inhaled the pure
morning air with keen delight.</p>
<p>"I love going out in the early morning," she declared.</p>
<p>"Well, I don't like it at all," Charles Rambert confessed with
characteristic candour. "Good Lord, how cold it is! And it is still
pitch dark!"</p>
<p>"Surely you are not going to be frightened?" said Thérèse
teasingly.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_18">[18]</a></span></p>
<p>Charles Rambert made an irritable movement of vexation and
surprise.</p>
<p>"Frightened? What do you take me for, Thérèse? If I don't
like going out in the early morning it's really only because it is
cold."</p>
<p>She laughed at him while they were crossing the lawn towards
the out-buildings, through which she meant to get out on to the
high road. As they passed the stables they came across a groom
who was leisurely getting an old brougham out of the coach-house.</p>
<p>"Don't hurry, Jean," Thérèse called out as she greeted him.
"We are going to walk to the station, and the only important
thing is that you should be there to bring us back."</p>
<p>The man touched his cap and the two young people passed
through the park gate and found themselves upon the high road.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>It was still very dark, with just a wan reflection in the distance
of the sky vaguely outlining some cloud-shapes to the eastward
to give some promise of the day. There was no sound to break
the silence of the fields, and as they walked briskly along
Charles and Thérèse could hear their footsteps ringing on the
hard surface of the frozen ground.</p>
<p>"It must please you awfully to be going to meet your father,"
said Mme. de Langrune's granddaughter half questioningly. "It
is a long time since you have seen him, isn't it?"</p>
<p>"Three years," Charles Rambert answered, "and then just for
a few minutes. He is coming home from America now, and before
that he travelled in Spain for a long time."</p>
<p>"He was travelling the whole time you were a child, wasn't
he?"</p>
<p>"Yes, always: either in Colombia, looking after his rubber
plantations there, or in Spain, where he has a good deal of property
too. When he was in Paris he used to come to the school
and ask for me, and I saw him in the parlour—for a quarter of
an hour."</p>
<p>"And your mother?"</p>
<p>"Oh, mamma was different. You know, Thérèse, I spent all<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_19">[19]</a></span>
the childhood that I can remember at the school. I liked the
masters and had good chums, and was very happy there, and if
the truth must be told I looked forward with anything but pleasure
to the holidays, when I had to go to my parents' house. I
always felt a stranger with them; my real home was the school-room,
where I had my desk and all my own interests. And then,
you know, when one is little one doesn't understand things
much; I didn't feel having hardly any family, very much."</p>
<p>"But you loved your mother very much?"</p>
<p>Thérèse asked the question quite anxiously, and it was patent
that she would have thought it dreadful if her companion had
not had a real affection for his mother.</p>
<p>"Oh, yes, I loved her," Charles Rambert answered; "but I
hardly knew her either." And as Thérèse showed her surprise he
went on, telling her something of the secret of his lonely childhood.
"You see, Thérèse, now that I am a man I guess lots of
things that I could not have had even a suspicion of then. My father
and mother did not get on well together. They were what
you call an ill-assorted couple. They were both very good, but
their characters did not harmonise. When I was little I always
saw mamma silent and sad, and papa active and on the go, and
bright and talking at the top of his voice. I half believe he frightened
mamma! And then my father was constantly away, whereas
mamma hardly ever went out. When a servant took me to the
house on Thursdays, I was taken up to say good morning to her,
and I invariably found her lying on a sofa in her room, with the
blinds down and almost dark. She just touched me with her lips
and asked me one or two questions, and then I was taken away
again because I tired her."</p>
<p>"Was she ill, then?"</p>
<p>"Mamma always has been ill. I suppose you know, Thérèse,
that three months ago—stay, it was just when I had taken my
degree and went to Germany—she was sent to an asylum? I believe
my father had wanted her to agree to undergo careful
treatment of the kind long before, but she would not."</p>
<p>Thérèse was silent for a few minutes.</p>
<p>"You have not been very happy," she said presently.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_20">[20]</a></span></p>
<p>"Oh, it was only after I grew up that I felt unhappy. When I
was a little chap I never thought of how sad it is to have no real
father or mother. The last four or five years it has hurt me, but
when he came to see me once at school, papa told me he would
take me with him as soon as I had taken my degree and grown
up. Last October, after my examination, he wrote and told me to
be patient a little longer, and that he was hurrying on with the
winding up of his business and coming back to France. That
gave me a hope which has brightened these last few months,
and will also make you understand why I am so pleased this
morning at my fathers coming. It seems to me that a new life is
going to begin."</p>
<p>Day was breaking now: a dirty December day, with the light
filtering through heavy grey clouds that drifted along the
ground, hid the horizon, clung to the low hills, and then suddenly
dispersed in long wisps driven by a keen breeze, that got
up in gusts, and drove clouds of dust along the hard frozen
ground.</p>
<p>"I have not been very happy either," said Thérèse, "for I lost
my father when I was tiny: I don't even remember him; and
mamma must be dead as well."</p>
<p>The ambiguous turning of the child's phrase caught Charles
Rambert's interested attention.</p>
<p>"What does that mean, Thérèse? Don't you know if your
mother is dead?"</p>
<p>"Yes, oh yes; grandmamma says so. But whenever I ask for
particulars grandmamma always changes the subject. I will echo
what you said just now: when you are little you don't know anything
and are not surprised at anything. For a long time I took
no notice of her sudden reticence, but now I sometimes wonder
if something is not being kept back from me—whether it is really
true that mamma is no more in this world."</p>
<p>Talking like this Thérèse and Charles had walked at a good
pace, and now they came to the few houses built around
Verrières station. One by one, bedroom windows and doors
were being opened; peasants were making their way to the
sheds to lead their cattle to the pastures.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_21">[21]</a></span></p>
<p>"We are very early," Thérèse remarked, pointing to the station
clock in the distance. "Your father's train is due at 6.55, and
it is only 6.40 now; we still have a quarter of an hour to wait, and
more, if the train is not punctual!"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>They went into the little station and Charles Rambert, thankful
for some shelter from the cold, stamped his feet, making a
sudden uproar in the empty waiting-room. A porter appeared.</p>
<p>"Who the deuce is kicking up all this row?" he began angrily,
and then seeing Thérèse, broke off short. "Ah, Mademoiselle
Thérèse," he said with the familiar yet perfectly respectful cordiality
that marks country folk, "up already? Have you come to
meet somebody, or are you going away?"</p>
<p>As he spoke, the porter turned a curious eye upon Charles
Rambert, whose arrival had caused quite a sensation two days
before in this little spot, where with but few exceptions none but
people belonging to the neighbourhood ever came by train.</p>
<p>"No, I am not going away," Thérèse replied. "I have accompanied
M. Rambert, who has come to meet his father."</p>
<p>"Ah-ha, to meet your papa, sir: is he coming from far?"</p>
<p>"From Paris," Charles Rambert answered. "Is the train signalled
yet?"</p>
<p>The man drew out a watch like a turnip, and looked at the
time.</p>
<p>"It won't be here for quite another twenty minutes. The work
on the tunnel makes it necessary to be careful, and it's always
late now. But you will hear when the bell rings: that will be
when the train is coming over the level-crossing; it will run into
the station three minutes after that. Well, Mademoiselle, I must
get on with my work," and the man left them.</p>
<p>Thérèse turned to Charles Rambert.</p>
<p>"Shall we go on to the platform? Then we shall see the train
come in."</p>
<p>So they left the waiting-room and began to walk up and down
the whole length of the platform. Thérèse watched the jerky
movements of the hands of the clock, and smiled at her companion.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_22">[22]</a></span></p>
<p>"Five minutes more, and your father will be here! Four minutes
more! Ah! There it is!" and she pointed to a slope in the distance
where a slight trail of smoke rose white against the blue of
the sky, now clear of cloud. "Can't you see it? That is the steam
from the engine coming out of the tunnel."</p>
<p>Ere she finished speaking the quivering whir of the bell
echoed through the empty station.</p>
<p>"Ah!" said Charles Rambert: "at last!"</p>
<p>The two porters who, with the stationmaster, constituted the
entire railway staff at Verrières, came bustling along the platform,
and while the bell continued its monotonous whirring
ring, pulled forward trucks in readiness for any possible luggage.
Puffing portentously, the engine slackened speed, and the heavy
train slowed down and finally stopped, bringing a noisy atmosphere
of life into the station of Verrières that but a moment ago
was so still.</p>
<p>The first-class carriages had stopped immediately in front of
Charles and Thérèse, and on the footboard Etienne Rambert
stood, a tall, elderly man of distinguished appearance, proud
bearing and energetic attitude, with extraordinarily keen eyes
and an unusually high and intelligent forehead. Seeing Thérèse
and Charles he seized his baggage and in a twinkling had sprung
on to the platform. He dropped his valise, tossed his bundle of
rugs on to a seat, and gripped Charles by the two shoulders.</p>
<p>"My boy!" he exclaimed; "my dear boy!"</p>
<p>Although he had hitherto shown so little affection for his
child, it was obvious that the man was making a great effort to
restrain his emotion, and was really moved when he now saw
him again as a grown young man.</p>
<p>Nor, on his part, did Charles Rambert remain unmoved. As if
the sudden grip of this almost stranger, who yet was his father,
had awakened a world of memories within him, he turned very
pale and his voice faltered as he replied:</p>
<p>"Papa! Dear papa! I am so glad to see you!"</p>
<p>Thérèse had drawn tactfully aside. M. Rambert still held his
son by the shoulders and stepped back a pace, the better to consider
him.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_23">[23]</a></span></p>
<p>"Why, you are a man! How you have altered, my boy! You are
just what I hoped you would be: tall and strong! Ah, you are my
son all right! And you are quite well, hey? Yet you look tired."</p>
<p>"I did not sleep well," Charles explained with a smile. "I was
afraid I should not wake up."</p>
<p>Turning his head, M. Rambert saw Thérèse and held out his
hand.</p>
<p>"How do you do, my little Thérèse?" he exclaimed. "You have
altered too since I saw you last. I left a little chit of a child, and
now I behold a grown-up young lady. Well! I must be off at once
to pay my respects to my dear old friend, your grandmother. All
well at the château, eh?"</p>
<p>Thérèse shook hands warmly with M. Rambert and thanked
him prettily.</p>
<p>"Grandmamma is very well; she told me to tell you to excuse
her if she did not come to meet you, but her doctor says she
must not get up very early."</p>
<p>"Of course your grandmamma is excused, my dear. Besides, I
have to thank her for her kindness to Charles, and for the hospitality
she is going to extend to me for a few days."</p>
<p>Meanwhile the train had gone on again, and now a porter
came up to M. Rambert.</p>
<p>"Will you take your luggage with you, sir?"</p>
<p>Recalled to material things, Etienne Rambert contemplated
his trunk which the porters had taken out of the luggage van.</p>
<p>"Good Lord!" he began, but Thérèse interrupted him.</p>
<p>"Grandmamma said she would send for your heavy luggage
during the morning, and that you could take your valise and any
small parcels with us in the brougham."</p>
<p>"What's that? Your grandmamma has taken the trouble to
send her carriage?"</p>
<p>"It's a long way to Beaulieu, you know," Thérèse replied. "Ask
Charles if it isn't. We came on foot and the walk would be too
tiring for you after a whole night in the train."</p>
<p>The three had reached the station yard, and Thérèse stopped
in surprise.</p>
<p>"Why, how's that?" she exclaimed; "the carriage is not here.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_24">[24]</a></span>
And yet Jean was beginning to get it ready when we left the
château."</p>
<p>M. Etienne Rambert was resting one hand on his son's shoulder,
and contemplating him with an affectionate, all-embracing
survey every now and then. He smiled at Thérèse.</p>
<p>"He may have been delayed, dear. I tell you what we will do.
Since your grandmamma is going to send for my luggage there is
no need for me to take my valise; we can leave everything in the
cloak-room and start for the château on foot; if my memory serves
me right—and it is a very good memory—there is only one road,
so we shall meet Jean and can get into the carriage on the way."</p>
<p>A few minutes later all three set out on the road to Beaulieu.
M. Rambert walked between the two young people; he had gallantly
offered his arm to Thérèse, who was not a little proud of
the attention, which proved to her mind that she was now regarded
as a grown-up young lady. On the other side of his father
Charles made answer to the incessant questions put to him.</p>
<p>M. Etienne Rambert enjoyed the walk in the quiet morning
through the peaceful country-side. With a tender half-melancholy
he recognised every turn in the road, every bit of scenery.</p>
<p>"Just fancy my coming back here at sixty years of age, with a
great son of eighteen!" he said with a laugh. "And I remember
as if it were yesterday the good times I have had at the château
of Beaulieu. Mme. de Langrune and I will have plenty of memories
to talk over. Gad! it must be quite forty years since I came
this way, and yet I remember every bit of it. Say, Thérèse, isn't
it the fact that we shall see the front of the château directly we
have passed this little copse?"</p>
<p>"Quite true," the girl answered with a laugh. "You know the
country very well, sir."</p>
<p>"Yes," said Etienne Rambert; "when one gets to my age, little
Thérèse, one always does remember the happy days of one's
youth; one remembers recent events much less distinctly. Most
likely that means, my dear, that the human heart declines to
grow old and refuses to preserve any but pictures of childhood."</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>For a few minutes M. Rambert remained silent, as if ab<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_25">[25]</a></span>sorbed
in somewhat melancholy reflections. But he soon recovered
himself and shook off the tender sadness evoked in his
mind by memories of the past.</p>
<p>"Why, the park enclosure has been altered," he exclaimed.
"Here is a wall which used not to be here: there was only a
hedge."</p>
<p>Thérèse laughed.</p>
<p>"I never knew the hedge," she said. "I have always seen the
wall."</p>
<p>"Must we go on to the main gate?" M. Rambert asked, "or has
your grandmamma had another gate made?"</p>
<p>"We are going in by the out-buildings," the girl answered; "then
we shall hear why Jean did not come to meet us." She opened a
little door half-hidden among the moss and ivy that clothed the
wall surrounding the park, and making M. Rambert and Charles
pass in before her, cried: "But Jean <i>has</i> gone with the brougham,
for the horses are not in the stable. How was it we did not meet
him?" Then she laughed. "Poor Jean! He is so muddle-headed! I
would not mind betting he went to meet us at Saint-Jaury, as he
does every morning to bring me home from church."</p>
<p>The little company, Etienne Rambert, Thérèse and Charles,
were now approaching the château. Passing beneath Mme. de
Langrune's windows Thérèse called merrily up to them.</p>
<p>"Here we are, grandmamma!"</p>
<p>There was no reply.</p>
<p>But at the window of an adjoining room appeared the figure
of the steward, Dollon, making a gesture, as if asking for silence.</p>
<p>Thérèse, in advance of her guests, had proceeded but a few
yards when Mme. de Langrune's old servant rushed down the
stone flight of steps in front of the château, towards M.
Rambert.</p>
<p>Dollon seemed distraught. Usually so respectful and so deferential
in manner, he now seized M. Rambert by the arm, and
imperiously waving Thérèse and Charles away, drew him aside.</p>
<p>"It is awful, sir," he exclaimed: "horrible: a fearful thing has
happened. We have just found Mme. la Marquise dead—murdered—in
her room!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_26">[26]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">III. The Hunt for the Man</span></h2>
<p>M. de Presles, the examining magistrate in charge of the
Court at Brives, had just arrived at the château of
Beaulieu, having been notified of the tragedy by the police
sergeant stationed at Saint-Jaury. The magistrate was a young,
fashionable, and rather aristocratic man of the world, whose
grievance it was to be tied down to work that was mechanical
rather than intellectual. He was essentially modern in his ideas,
and his chief ambition was to get away as quickly as possible
from the small provincial town to which he had been exiled by
the changes and chances of promotion; he was sick of Brives,
and now it occurred to him that a crime like this present one
would give him an opportunity of displaying his gifts of intuition
and deduction, prove his quality, and so might enable him to get
another appointment. After Dollon had received him at the
château, the magistrate had first of all made enquiry as to who
was in the house at the time. From the information given him
he was satisfied that it was unnecessary to subject either
Thérèse or Charles Rambert to immediate examination, both of
the young people being much too upset to be able to reply to serious
questions, and both having been taken away to the house
of the Baronne de Vibray. It was, also, clear that M. Rambert senior,
who had only arrived after the crime, could not furnish any
interesting information.</p>
<p>"Tell me exactly how you discovered the crime, M. Dollon,"
he said as, pale and trembling, the steward accompanied him
along the corridor to the scene of the murder.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_27">[27]</a></span></p>
<p>"I went this morning as usual, sir," the steward replied, "to say
good morning to Mme. de Langrune and receive her orders for
the day. I knocked at her door as I always did, but got no answer.
I knocked louder, but still there was no answer. I don't know
why I opened the door instead of going away; perhaps I had
some kind of presentiment. Oh, I shall never forget the shock I
had when I saw my poor dear mistress lying dead at the foot of
her bed, steeped in blood, and with such a horrible gash in her
throat that for a moment I thought her head was severed from
the trunk."</p>
<p>The police sergeant corroborated the steward's story.</p>
<p>"The murder certainly was committed with peculiarly horrible
violence, sir," he remarked. "The body shows that the victim
was struck with the utmost fury. The murderer must have gone
mad over the corpse from sheer lust of blood. The wounds are
shocking."</p>
<p>"Knife wounds?" M. de Presles asked.</p>
<p>"I don't know," said the sergeant uncertainly. "Your worship
can form your own opinion."</p>
<p>The magistrate followed the steward into the room where
Dollon had taken care that nothing was touched.</p>
<p>In its furniture and general arrangement Mme. de Langrune's
room corresponded with the character of the old lady. It was
large, and quietly furnished with old presses, arm-chairs, chairs
and old-fashioned tables. It was evident that she had had no liking
for modern fashions, but had preferred to have her own
room stamped with the rather severe, yet very comfortable
character of former days.</p>
<p>The whole of one side of the room was filled by the
Marquise's bed. It was large, and raised upon a kind of dais covered
with a carpet of subdued tones. At the foot of the bed, on
the right, was a large window, fastened half open despite the
keen cold, no doubt for hygienic reasons. In the middle of the
room was a round mahogany table with a few small articles upon
it, a blotting-pad, books and so on. In one corner a large crucifix
was suspended from the wall with a prie-Dieu in front of it,
the velvet of which had been worn white by the old lady's knees.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_28">[28]</a></span>
Finally, a little further away, was a small escritoire, half open
now, with its drawers gaping and papers scattered on the floor.</p>
<p>There were only two ways of ingress into the room: one by the
door through which the magistrate had entered, which opened
on to the main corridor on the first floor, and the other by a door
communicating with the Marquise's dressing-room; this dressing-room
was lighted by a large window, which was shut.</p>
<p>The magistrate was shocked by the spectacle presented by
the corpse of the Marquise. It was lying on its back on the floor,
with the arms extended; the head was towards the bed, the feet
towards the window. The body was almost naked. A gash ran almost
right across the throat, leaving the bones exposed. Torrents
of blood had saturated the victim's clothes, and on the carpet
round the body a wide stain was still slowly spreading wider.</p>
<p>M. de Presles stooped over the dead woman.</p>
<p>"What an appalling wound!" he muttered. "The medical evidence
will explain what weapon it was made with; but no doctor
is required to point out the violence of the blow or the fury of
the murderer." He turned to the old steward who, at sight of his
mistress, could hardly restrain his tears. "Nothing has been
moved in the room, eh?"</p>
<p>"Nothing, sir."</p>
<p>The magistrate pointed to the escritoire with its open
drawers.</p>
<p>"That has not been touched?"</p>
<p>"No, sir."</p>
<p>"I suppose that is where Mme. de Langrune kept her valuables?"</p>
<p>The steward shook his head.</p>
<p>"The Marquise could not have had any large sum of money in
the house: a few hundred francs perhaps for daily expenses, but
certainly no more."</p>
<p>"So you do not think robbery was the motive of the crime?"</p>
<p>The steward shrugged his shoulders.</p>
<p>"The murderer may have thought that Mme. de Langrune
had money here, sir. But anyhow he must have been disturbed,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_29">[29]</a></span>
because he did not take away the rings the Marquise had laid
upon the dressing-table before she got into bed."</p>
<p>The magistrate walked slowly round the room.</p>
<p>"This window was open?" he asked.</p>
<p>"The Marquise always left it like that; she liked all the fresh
air she could get."</p>
<p>"Might not the murderer have got in that way?"</p>
<p>The steward shook his head.</p>
<p>"It is most unlikely, sir. See: the windows are fitted outside
with a kind of grating pointing outwards and downwards, and I
think that would prevent anyone from climbing in."</p>
<p>M. de Presles saw that this was so. Continuing his investigation,
he satisfied himself that there was nothing about the furniture
in that room, or in the dressing-room, to show that the
murderer had been through them, except the disorder on and
about the little escritoire. At last he came to the door which
opened on to the corridor.</p>
<p>"Ah!" he exclaimed: "this is interesting!" and with a finger he
pointed to the inner bolt on the door, the screws of which were
wrenched half out, showing that an attempt had been made to
force the door. "Did Mme. de Langrune bolt her door every
night?" he asked.</p>
<p>"Yes, always," Dollon answered. "She was very nervous, and if
I was the first to come to bid her good morning I always heard
her unfasten that bolt when I knocked."</p>
<p>M. de Presles made no reply. He made one more tour of the
room, minutely considering the situation of each single article.</p>
<p>"M. Dollon, will you kindly take me where I can have the use
of a table and inkstand, and anything else I may need to get on
with my preliminary enquiry?"</p>
<p>"Your clerk is waiting for you in the library, sir," the steward
replied. "He has everything ready for you there."</p>
<p>"Very well. If it is convenient to you we will join him now."</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>M. de Presles followed Dollon down to the library on the
ground floor, where his enterprising clerk had already estab<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_30">[30]</a></span>lished
himself. The magistrate took his seat behind a large table
and called to the police sergeant.</p>
<p>"I shall ask you to be present during my enquiry, sergeant.
The first investigations will devolve upon you, so it will be well
for you to hear all the details the witnesses can furnish me with.
I suppose you have taken no steps as yet?"</p>
<p>"Beg pardon, sir: I have sent my men out in all directions,
with orders to interrogate all tramps and to detain any who do
not give a satisfactory account of their time last night."</p>
<p>"Good! By the way, while I think of it, have you sent off the
telegram I gave you when I arrived—the telegram to the police
head-quarters in Paris, asking for a detective to be sent down?"</p>
<p>"I took it to the telegraph office myself, sir."</p>
<p>His mind made easy on this score, the young magistrate
turned to Dollon.</p>
<p>"Will you please take a seat, sir?" he said and, disregarding
the disapproving looks of his clerk, who had a particular
predilection for all the long circumlocutions and red tape of the
law, he pretermitted the usual questions as to name and age and
occupation of the witnesses, and began his enquiry by questioning
the old steward. "What is the exact plan of the château?" was
his first enquiry.</p>
<p>"You know it now, sir, almost as well as I do. The passage from
the front door leads to the main staircase, which we went up just
now, to the first floor where the bedroom of the Marquise is situated.
The first floor contains a series of rooms separated by a
corridor. On the right is Mlle. Thérèse's room, and then come
guest-chambers which are not occupied now. On the left is the
bedroom of the Marquise, followed by her dressing-room on the
same side, and after that there is another dressing-room and
then the bedroom occupied by M. Charles Rambert."</p>
<p>"Good. And the floor above: how is that arranged?"</p>
<p>"The second floor is exactly like the first floor, sir, except that
there are only servants' rooms there. They are smaller, and there
are more of them."</p>
<p>"What servants sleep in the house?"</p>
<p>"As a general rule, sir, the two maid-servants, Marie the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_31">[31]</a></span>
housemaid and Louise the cook, and also Hervé the butler; but
Hervé did not sleep in the château last night. He had asked the
mistress's permission to go into the village, and she had given it
to him on condition that he did not come back that night."</p>
<p>"What do you mean?" enquired the magistrate, rather surprised.</p>
<p>"The Marquise was rather nervous, sir, and did not like the
idea of anyone being able to get into the house at night; so she
was always careful to double-lock the front door and the kitchen
door herself every night. She went round all the rooms too every
night, and made sure that all the iron shutters were properly fastened,
and that it was impossible for anyone to get into the
house. When Hervé goes out in the evenings he either sleeps in
the village and does not return till the following morning, which
is what he did to-day, or else he asks the coachman to leave the
yard door unlocked, and sleeps in a room above the stables
which as a rule is not occupied."</p>
<p>"That is where the other servants sleep, I suppose?"</p>
<p>"Yes, sir. The gardeners, the coachman, and the keepers all
live in the out-buildings. With regard to myself, I have a small
cottage a little farther away in the park."</p>
<p>M. de Presles sat silent for a few moments, thinking deeply.
The only sound in the room was the irritating squeak of the
clerk's quill pen, as he industriously wrote down all the steward's
replies. At last M. de Presles looked up.</p>
<p>"So, on the night of the crime the only persons sleeping in the
château were Mme. de Langrune, her granddaughter Mlle.
Thérèse, M. Charles Rambert and the two maids. Is that so?"</p>
<p>"Yes, sir."</p>
<p>"Then it does not seem likely that the crime was committed
by anyone living in the château?"</p>
<p>"That is so, sir:—and yet I do not believe that anybody got
into the château; only two people had a key of the front door—the
Marquise and myself. When I got to the house this morning
I found the door open, because Mlle. Thérèse went out early
with M. Charles Rambert to meet M. Rambert, senior, at the
station, and she opened the door with the keys that the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_32">[32]</a></span>
Marquise had given into her care the night before; but she told
me herself that when she started to meet the train at five o'clock
the door was shut. Mlle. Thérèse had put her keys under her pillow,
and my bunch had never left my possession."</p>
<p>"Is it not possible," the magistrate suggested, "that someone
may have got in during the day, hidden himself, and have committed
the crime when night came? Remember, M. Dollon, the
bolt inside Mme. de Langrune's bedroom door has been
wrenched away: that means that the murderer made his entrance
by that door, and made it by force."</p>
<p>But the steward shook his head.</p>
<p>"No, sir, nobody could have secreted himself in the château
during the day; people are always coming to the kitchen, so the
back door is under constant supervision; and all yesterday afternoon
there were gardeners at work on the lawn in front of the
main entrance; if any stranger had presented himself there he
would certainly have been seen; and finally, Mme. de Langrune
had given orders, which I always attended to myself, to keep the
door locked through which one gets down to the cellars. So the
murderer could not have hidden in the basement, and where
else could he have hidden? Not in the rooms on the ground
floor: there was company to dinner last night, and all the rooms
were used more or less; the Marquise, or some one of the
guests, would certainly have discovered him. So he would have
had to be upstairs, either on the first or second floor: that is most
unlikely: it would have been very risky; besides, the big house-dog
is fastened up at the foot of the staircase during the day, and
he would not have let any stranger pass him: either the dog must
have known the man, or at all events some meat must have been
thrown to him; but there are no traces to show that anything of
the sort was done."</p>
<p>The magistrate was much perplexed.</p>
<p>"Then the crime is inexplicable, M. Dollon. You have just told
me yourself that there was no one in the château but Mme. de
Langrune, the two young people Thérèse and Charles, and the
two maids: it certainly is not any one of those who can be the
guilty person, for the way in which the crime was committed,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_33">[33]</a></span>
and the force of the blows dealt, show that the criminal was a
man—a professional murderer in fact. Consequently the guilty
person must have got in from outside. Come now, have you no
suspicions at all?"</p>
<p>The steward raised his arms and let them fall in utter
dejection.</p>
<p>"No," he replied at last, "I do not suspect anybody! I cannot
suspect anybody! But, sir, as far as I am concerned, I feel certain
that although the murderer was not one of those who occupied
the château last night he nevertheless did not come in from outside.
It was not possible! The doors were locked and the shutters
were fastened."</p>
<p>"Nevertheless," M. de Presles remarked, "inasmuch as someone
has committed a murder, it must necessarily be the fact, either
that that someone was hidden inside the château when
Mme. de Langrune herself locked the front door, or else that he
got in during the night. Do you not see yourself, M. Dollon, that
one or other of these two hypotheses must be correct?"</p>
<p>The steward hesitated.</p>
<p>"It is a mystery, sir," he declared at last. "I swear to you, sir,
that nobody could have got in, and yet it is perfectly clear also
that neither M. Charles nor Mlle. Thérèse, nor yet either of the
two maids, Marie and Louise, is the murderer."</p>
<p>M. de Presles sat wrapped in thought for a few minutes and
then desired the old steward to fetch the two women servants.</p>
<p>"Come back, yourself," he added, as the old man went away;
"I may require further particulars from you."</p>
<p>Dollon left the room, and Gigou, the clerk, leant forward towards
the magistrate: tact was not the most shining of M.
Gigou's qualities.</p>
<p>"When your enquiry is finished, sir—presently—we shall
have to pay a visit to the Mayor of Saint-Jaury. That is in accordance
with the usual procedure. And then he cannot do less
than invite us to stay to dinner!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_34">[34]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">IV. "No! I am not Mad!"</span></h2>
<p>The next day but one after the crime, on the Friday, Louise
the cook, who was still terribly upset by the dreadful death
of the good mistress in whose service she had been for fifteen
years, came down to her kitchen early. It was scarcely daybreak,
and the good woman was obliged to light a lamp to see by. With
her mind anywhere but on her work, she was mechanically getting
breakfast for the servants and for the visitors to the château,
when a sharp knock on the back door made her jump. She went
to open it, and uttered a little scream as she saw the cocked hats
of gendarmes silhouetted against the wan light of the early
morning.</p>
<p>Between the gendarmes were two miserable-looking specimens
of humanity. Louise had only opened the door a few
inches when the sergeant, who had known her for many years,
took a step forward and gave her a military salute.</p>
<p>"I must ask your hospitality for us and for these two fellows
whom we have taken up to-night, prowling about the neighbourhood,"
he said.</p>
<p>The dismayed Louise broke in.</p>
<p>"Good heavens, sergeant, are you bringing thieves here?
Where do you expect me to put them? Surely there's enough
trouble in the house as it is!"</p>
<p>The gendarme, Morand, smiled with the disillusioned air of a
man who knows very well what trouble is, and the sergeant
replied:</p>
<p>"Put them? Why, in your kitchen, of course," and as the servant
made a sign of refusal, he added: "I am sorry, but you must;<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_35">[35]</a></span>
besides, there's nothing for you to be afraid of; the men are
handcuffed, and we shall not leave them. We are going to wait
here for the magistrate who will examine them."</p>
<p>The gendarmes had pushed their wretched captives in before
them, two tramps of the shadiest appearance.</p>
<p>Louise, who had gone mechanically to raise the lid of a kettle
beginning to boil over, looked round at his last words.</p>
<p>"The magistrate?" she said: "M. de Presles? Why, he is here
now—in the library."</p>
<p>"No?" exclaimed the sergeant, jumping up from the kitchen
chair on which he had seated himself.</p>
<p>"He is, I tell you," the old woman insisted; "and the little man
who generally goes about with him is here too."</p>
<p>"You mean M. Gigou, his clerk?"</p>
<p>"Very likely," muttered Louise.</p>
<p>"I leave the prisoners with you, Morand," said the sergeant
curtly; "don't let them out of your sight. I am going to the magistrate.
I have no doubt he will wish to interrogate these fellows
at once."</p>
<p>The gendarme came to attention and saluted.</p>
<p>"Trust me, sergeant!"</p>
<p>It looked as if Morand's job was going to be an easy one; the
two tramps, huddled up in a corner of the kitchen opposite the
stove, showed no disposition to make their escape. The two were
utterly different in appearance. One was a tall, strongly built man,
with thick hair crowned by a little jockey cap, and was enveloped
in a kind of overcoat which might have been black once but which
was now of a greenish hue, the result of the inclemency of the
weather; he gnawed his heavy moustache in silence and turned
sombre, uneasy looks on all, including his companion in misfortune.
He wore hobnailed shoes and carried a stout cudgel. He
was more like a piece of the human wreckage one sees in the
street corners of great cities than a genuine tramp. Instead of a
collar, there was a variegated handkerchief round his neck. His
name, he had told the sergeant, was François Paul.</p>
<p>The other man, who had been discovered at the back of a
farm just as he was about to crawl inside a stack, was a typical<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_36">[36]</a></span>
country tramp. An old soft felt hat was crammed down on his
head, and a shock of rebellious red and grey hair curled up all
round it, while a hairy beard entirely concealed all the features
of his face. All that could be seen of it was a pair of sparkling
eyes incessantly moving in every possible direction. This second
man contemplated with interest the place into which the police
had conducted him. On his back he bore a heavy sort of wallet
in which he stowed articles of the most varied description.
Whereas his companion maintained a rigid silence, this man
never stopped talking. Nudging his neighbour every now and
then he whispered:</p>
<p>"Say, where do you come from? You're not from these parts,
are you? I've never seen you before have I? Everybody round
here knows me: Bouzille—my name's Bouzille," and turning to
the gendarme he said: "Isn't it true, M'sieu Morand, that you
and I are old acquaintances? This is the fourth or fifth time
you've pinched me, isn't it?"</p>
<p>Bouzille's companion vouchsafed him a glance.</p>
<p>"So it's a habit of yours, is it?" he said in the same low tone;
"you often get nabbed?"</p>
<p>"As to 'often,'" the garrulous fellow replied, "that depends on
what you mean by the word. In winter time it's not bad business
to go back to clink, because of the rotten weather; in the summer
one would rather go easy, and then, too, in the summer
there isn't so much crime; you can find all you want on the road;
country people aren't so particular in the summer, while in the
winter it's quite another thing; so they have done me down to-night
for mother Chiquard's rabbit, I expect."</p>
<p>The gendarme, who had been listening with no great attention,
chimed in.</p>
<p>"So it was you who stole the rabbit, was it, Bouzille?"</p>
<p>"What's the good of your asking me that, M'sieu Morand?"
protested Bouzille. "I suppose you would have left me alone if
you hadn't been sure of it?"</p>
<p>Bouzille's companion bent his head and whispered very low:</p>
<p>"There has been something worse than that: the job with the
lady of this house."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_37">[37]</a></span></p>
<p>"Oh, that!" said Bouzille with a gesture of complete indifference.
But he did not proceed. The sergeant came back to the
kitchen and said sternly:</p>
<p>"François Paul, forward: the examining magistrate will hear
you now."</p>
<p>The man summoned stepped towards the sergeant, and quietly
submitted to being taken by the arm, for his hands were fastened.
Bouzille winked knowingly at the gendarme, now his sole
remaining confidant, and remarked with satisfaction:</p>
<p>"Good luck! We are getting on to-day! Not too much 'remanded'
about it," and as the gendarme, severely keeping his
proper distance, made no reply, the incorrigible chatterbox went
on merrily: "As a matter of fact it suits me just as well to be committed
for trial, since the government give you your board and
lodging, and especially since there's a really beautiful prison at
Brives now." He leaned familiarly against the gendarme's shoulder.
"Ah, M'sieu Morand, you didn't know it—you weren't old
enough—why, it was before you joined the force—but the lock-up
used to be in an old building just behind the Law Courts:
dirty! I should think it was dirty! And damp! Why once, when I
did three months there, from January to April, I came out so ill
with the rheumatics that I had to go back into the infirmary for
another fortnight! Gad!" he went on after a moment's pause
during which he snuffed the air around him, "something smells
jolly good here!" He unceremoniously addressed the cook who
was busy at her work: "Mightn't there perhaps be a bit of a blow
out for me, Mme. Louise?" and as she turned round with a
somewhat scandalised expression he continued: "you needn't be
frightened, lady, you know me very well. Many a time I've come
and asked you for any old thing, and you've always given me
something. M'sieu Dollon, too: whenever he has an old pair of
shoes that are worn out, well, those are mine; and a crust of
bread is what nobody ever refuses."</p>
<p>The cook hesitated, touched by the recollections evoked by
the poor tramp; she looked at the gendarme for a sign of encouragement.
Morand shrugged his shoulders and turned a
patronising gaze on Bouzille.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_38">[38]</a></span></p>
<p>"Give him something, if you like, Mme. Louise. After all, he
is well known. And for my own part I don't believe he could
have done it."</p>
<p>The tramp interrupted him.</p>
<p>"Ah, M'sieu Morand, if it's a matter of picking up trifles here
and there, a wandering rabbit, perhaps, or a fowl that's tired of
being lonely, I don't say no; but as for anything else—thank'ee
kindly, lady."</p>
<p>Louise had handed Bouzille a huge chunk of bread which he
immediately interned in the depths of his enormous bag.</p>
<p>"What do you suppose that other chap can have to tell Mr.
Paul Pry? He did not look like a regular! Now when I get before
the gentlemen in black, I don't want to contradict them, and so
I always say, 'Yes, my lord,' and they are perfectly satisfied;
sometimes they laugh and the president of the court says, 'Stand
up, Bouzille,' and then he gives me a fortnight, or twenty-one
days, or a month, as the case may be."</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>The sergeant came back, alone, and addressed the gendarme.</p>
<p>"The other man has been discharged," he said. "As for
Bouzille, M. de Presles does not think there is any need to interrogate
him."</p>
<p>"Am I to be punted out then?" enquired the tramp with some
dismay, as he looked uneasily towards the window, against the
glass of which rain was lashing.</p>
<p>The sergeant could not restrain a smile.</p>
<p>"Well, no, Bouzille," he said kindly, "we must take you to the
lock-up; there's the little matter of the rabbit to be cleared up, you
know. Come now, quick march! Take him to Saint-Jaury, Morand!"</p>
<p>The sergeant went back to the library to hold himself at the
magistrate's disposal; through the torrential downpour of rain
Bouzille and the gendarme wended their way to the village; and
left alone in her kitchen, Louise put out her lamp, for despite
the shocking weather it was getting lighter now, and communed
with herself.</p>
<p>"I've a kind of idea that they would have done better to keep
that other man. He was a villainous-looking fellow!"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_39">[39]</a></span></p>
<p>The sad, depressing day had passed without any notable incident.</p>
<p>Charles Rambert and his father had spent the afternoon with
Thérèse and the Baronne de Vibray continuously addressing
large black-edged envelopes to the relations and friends of the
Marquise de Langrune, whose funeral had been fixed for the
next day but one.</p>
<p>A hasty dinner had been served at which the Baronne de
Vibray was present. Her grief was distressing to witness.
Somewhat futile to outward seeming, this woman had a very
kind and tender heart; as a matter of course she had constituted
herself the protector and comforter of Thérèse, and she had
spent the whole of the previous day with the child at Brives, ransacking
the local shops to procure her mourning.</p>
<p>Thérèse was terribly shocked by the dreadful death of her
grandmother whom she adored, but she displayed unexpected
strength of character and controlled her grief so that she might
be able to look after the guests whom she was now entertaining
for the first time as mistress of the house. The Baronne de
Vibray had failed in her attempt to persuade Thérèse to come
with her to Querelles to sleep. Thérèse was determined in her
refusal to leave the château and what she termed her "post of
duty."</p>
<p>"Marie will stay with me," she assured the kind Baronne, "and
I promise you I shall have sufficient courage to go to sleep to-night."</p>
<p>So her friend got into her car alone at nine o'clock and went
back to her own house, and Thérèse went up at once to bed with
Marie, the faithful servant who, like Louise the cook, had been
with her ever since she was born.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>After having read all the newspapers, with their minute and
often inaccurate account of the tragedy at Beaulieu—for everyone
in the château had been besieged the previous day by
reporters and representatives of various press agencies—M.
Etienne Rambert said to his son simply, but with a marked
gravity:<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_40">[40]</a></span></p>
<p>"Let us go upstairs, my son: it is time."</p>
<p>At the door of his room Charles deferentially offered his
cheek to his father, but M. Etienne Rambert seemed to hesitate;
then, as if taking a sudden resolution, he entered his son's room
instead of going on to his own. Charles kept silence and refrained
from asking any questions, for he had noticed how lost
in sad thought his father had seemed to be since the day before.</p>
<p>Charles Rambert was very tired. He began to undress at once.
He had taken off his coat and waistcoat, and was turning towards
a looking-glass to undo his tie, when his father came up
to him; with an abrupt movement M. Etienne Rambert put both
his hands on his son's shoulders and looked him straight in the
eyes. Then in a stifled but peremptory tone he said:</p>
<p>"Now confess, unhappy boy! Confess to your father!"</p>
<p>Charles went ghastly white.</p>
<p>"What?" he muttered.</p>
<p>Etienne Rambert kept his eyes fixed upon him.</p>
<p>"It was you who committed the murder!"</p>
<p>The ringing denial that the young man tried to utter was
strangled in his throat; he threw out his arms and groped with
his hands as if to find something to support him in his faintness;
then he pulled himself together.</p>
<p>"Committed the murder? I? You accuse me of having killed
the Marquise? It is infamous, hateful, awful!"</p>
<p>"Alas, yes!"</p>
<p>"No, no! Good God, no!"</p>
<p>"Yes!" Etienne Rambert insisted.</p>
<p>The two men faced each other, panting. Charles controlled
the emotion which was sweeping over him once more, and looking
steadily at his father, said in tones of bitter reproach:</p>
<p>"And it is actually my own father who says that—who suspects
me!"</p>
<p>Tears filled the young fellow's eyes and sobs choked him; he
grew whiter still, and seemed so near collapse that his father had
to support him to a chair, where he remained for several minutes
utterly prostrated.</p>
<p>M. Rambert paced up and down the room a few times, then<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_41">[41]</a></span>
took another chair and sat down in front of his son. Passing a
hand across his brow as if to sweep away the horrible nightmare
that was haunting him, he spoke again.</p>
<p>"Come now, my boy, my poor boy, let us talk it over quietly. I
do not know how it was, but yesterday morning when I saw you
at the station I had a presentiment of something: you were haggard,
and tired, and your eyes were drawn——"</p>
<p>"I told you before," Charles answered tonelessly "that I had
had a bad night: I was over-excited and did not sleep: I was
awake the whole night."</p>
<p>"By Jove, yes!" his father rapped out: "I can believe that! But
if you were not asleep, how do you account for your not hearing
anything?"</p>
<p>"Thérèse did not hear anything either," said Charles after a
moment's reflection.</p>
<p>"Thérèse's room was a long way off," M. Rambert replied,
"while there was only a thin wall between yours and that of the
Marquise. You must have heard: you did hear! More than
that——, oh, my boy, my unhappy boy!"</p>
<p>Charles was twisting and untwisting his hands, and great
drops of cold perspiration beaded his brow.</p>
<p>"You are the only single person who thinks I committed such
an awful crime!" he said, half questioningly.</p>
<p>"The only one?" Etienne Rambert muttered. "Perhaps! As
yet! But you ought to know that you made a very bad impression
indeed upon the friends of the Marquise during the evening
before the crime, when President Bonnet was reading the particulars
of a murder that had been committed in Paris by—somebody:
I forget whom."</p>
<p>"Good heavens!" Charles exclaimed in indignation, "I did not
say anything wrong. Do you mean to say that just because I am
interested in stories of great criminals like Rocambole and
Fantômas——"</p>
<p>"You created a deplorable impression," his father repeated.</p>
<p>"So they suspect me too, do they?" Charles enquired. "But
you can't make accusations like that," he said, warming up:
"you've got to have facts, and proofs." He looked at his father for<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_42">[42]</a></span>
the sympathy and encouragement of affection. "Listen, papa, I
know you will believe me when I swear that I am innocent; but
do you think other people——"</p>
<p>M. Etienne Rambert sat with his head between his hands,
wrapped in thought; there was a short silence before the unhappy
father replied:</p>
<p>"Unfortunately there is evidence against you," he said at last;
"and damning evidence, too!" he added with a glance at his son
that seemed to pulverise him. "Terrible evidence! Consider,
Charles: the magistrates have decided, as a result of their investigations,
that no one got into the château on the fatal night; you
were the only man who slept there; and none but a man could
possibly have committed such a horrible crime, such a monstrous
piece of butchery!"</p>
<p>"Someone might have got in from outside," the unhappy lad
urged, as if trying to escape from the network in which he was
being entangled.</p>
<p>"No one did," Etienne Rambert insisted; "besides, how could
you prove it?"</p>
<p>Charles was silent. He stood in the middle of the room, with
trembling legs and haggard eyes, seemingly stupefied and incapable
of coherent thought, vacantly watching his father. With
bent head and shoulders bowed as though beneath a too-heavy
load, Etienne Rambert moved towards the dressing-room attached
to the bedroom.</p>
<p>"Come here," he said in an almost inaudible voice; "follow
me."</p>
<p>He went into the dressing-room, and picking up the towels
that were heaped anyhow on the lower rail of the washstand, he
selected a very crumpled one and held it out in front of his son.</p>
<p>"Look at that!" he said in a low, curt tone.</p>
<p>And on the towel, thus held in the light, Charles Rambert saw
red stains of blood. The lad started, and was about to burst into
some protestation, but Etienne Rambert imperiously checked
him.</p>
<p>"Do you still deny it? Unhappy, wretched boy, there is the
convincing, irrefutable evidence of your guilt! These stains of<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_43">[43]</a></span>
blood proclaim it. Something always is overlooked! How are you
to explain the presence of this blood-stained linen in your room?
Can you still deny that it is proof positive of your guilt?"</p>
<p>"But I do deny it, I do deny it! I don't understand! I know
nothing about it!" and once more Charles Rambert collapsed
into the arm-chair; the unhappy lad was nothing but a human
wreck, with no strength to argue or even utter a word.</p>
<p>His father's eyes rested on him, filled with infinite affection
and profoundest pity.</p>
<p>"My poor, poor boy!" the unhappy Etienne Rambert murmured,
and added, as if speaking only to himself: "I wonder if
you are not entirely responsible—if there are circumstances to
plead for you!"</p>
<p>"Do you still accuse me, papa? Do you really believe I am the
murderer?"</p>
<p>Etienne Rambert shook his head hopelessly.</p>
<p>"Oh, I wish, I wish," he exclaimed, "that for the honour of our
name, and for the sake of those who love us, I could prove you
had congenital, hereditary tendencies that made you not responsible!
Why could not I have watched over your upbringing?
Why has fate decreed that I should only see my son three times
at most in eighteen years, and come home to find him—a criminal?
Oh, if science could but establish the fact that the child of
a tainted mother——"</p>
<p>"Tainted?" Charles exclaimed; "what do you mean?"</p>
<p>"Tainted with a terrible and mysterious disease," Etienne
Rambert went on: "a disease before which we are powerless and
unarmed—insanity!"</p>
<p>"What?" cried Charles, growing momentarily more distressed
and bewildered; "what is that, papa? Are my wits going? My
mother insane?" And then he added hopelessly: "My God! You
must be right! Often and often I have been amazed by her
strange, puzzling looks and behaviour! But I—I have all my
proper senses: I know what I am doing!"</p>
<p>"Was it, perhaps, some appalling hallucination," Etienne
Rambert suggested: "some moment of irresponsibility?"</p>
<p>But Charles saw what he meant and cut him short.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_44">[44]</a></span></p>
<p>"No, no, papa! I am not mad! I am not mad! I am not mad!"</p>
<p>In his intense excitement the young fellow never thought of
moderating the tone of his voice, but shouted out what was in
his mind, shouted it into the silence of the night, heedless of all
but this terrible discussion he was having with the father whom
he loved. Nor did Etienne Rambert lower his voice: his son's impassioned
protest wrung the retort from him:</p>
<p>"Then, Charles, if you are right, your crime is beyond forgiveness!
Murderer! Murderer!"</p>
<p>The two men stopped short as a slight sound in the passage
caught their attention. A silence fell upon them that they could
not break, and they stood dumbfounded, nervous and overwrought.</p>
<p>The door of the room opened very slowly, and a white form
appeared against the darkness of the corridor outside.</p>
<p>Robed in a long night-dress, Thérèse stood there, with hair
dishevelled, bloodless lips, and eyes dilated with horror; the
child was shaking from head to foot; as if every movement hurt
her, she painfully raised her arm and pointed to Charles.</p>
<p>"Thérèse!" Etienne Rambert muttered: "Thérèse, you were
outside?"</p>
<p>The child's lips moved: she seemed to be making a more than
human effort, and a whisper escaped her lips:</p>
<p>"Yes——"</p>
<p>But she could say no more: her eyes rolled, her whole frame
tottered, and then, without sign or cry, she fell rigid and unconscious
to the floor.</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_45">[45]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">V. "Arrest Me!"</span></h2>
<p>Twelve or thirteen miles from Souillac the main line from
Brives to Cahors, which flanks the slope, describes a rather
sharp curve. The journey is a particularly picturesque one, and
travellers who make it during the daytime have much that is interesting
and agreeable to see; but while they are admiring the
country, which marks the transition from the severe region of
the Limousin to the more laughing landscapes on the confines
of the Midi, the train suddenly plunges into a tunnel which runs
for half a mile and more through the heart of the mountain
slope. Leaving the tunnel, the line continues along the slope,
then gradually descends towards Souillac. Two or three miles
from that little station, which is a junction, the line runs alongside
the highroad to Salignac, skirts for a brief distance the
Corrèze, one of the largest tributaries on the right bank of the
Dordogne, and then plunges into the heart of Lot.</p>
<p>Torrential winter rains had seriously affected the railway embankment,
particularly near the mouth of the tunnel; a succession
of heavy storms in the early part of December had so
greatly weakened the ballast that the chief engineers of the
Company had been hastily summoned to the scene of the mischief.
The experts decided that very important repairs were required
close to the Souillac end of the tunnel. It was necessary
to put in a complete system of drainage, with underground
pipes through which the water that came down from the mountain
could escape between the ballast and the side of the rock
and so pass underneath the permanent way. The sleepers, too,
had been loosened by the bad weather, and some of them had<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_46">[46]</a></span>
perished so much that the chairs were no longer fast, a matter
which was all the more serious because the line described a very
sharp curve at that precise spot.</p>
<p>Gangs of first-class navvies had been hurriedly requisitioned,
but in spite of the fact that an exceptional rate of wages was
paid, a local strike had broken out and for some days all work
was stopped. Gradually, however, moderate counsels prevailed
and for over a week now, nearly all the men had taken up their
tools again. Nevertheless, for a month past, these various circumstances
had resulted in all the trains running between
Brives and Cahors, being regularly half an hour late. Further, in
view of the dangerous state of the line, all engine drivers coming
from Brives had received orders to stop their trains two hundred
yards from the end of the tunnel, and all drivers coming
from Cahors to stop their trains five hundred yards before the
entrance to the tunnel, so that should a train appear while any
work was going on which rendered it dangerous to pass, it could
wait until the work was completed. The order was also issued
with the primary object of preventing the workers on the line
from being taken by surprise.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Day was just breaking this grey December morning, when
the gang of navvies set to work under a foreman, fixing on the
down line the new sleepers which had been brought up the day
before. Suddenly a shrill whistle was heard, and in the gaping
black mouth of the tunnel the light of two lamps became visible;
a train bound for Cahors had stopped in accordance with orders,
and was calling for permission to pass.</p>
<p>The foreman ranged his men on either side of the down line
and walked to a small cabin erected at the mouth of the tunnel,
where he pulled the hand-signal so as to show the green light,
thereby authorising the train to proceed on its way.</p>
<p>There was a second short, sharp whistle; heavy puffs escaped
from the engine, and belching forth a dense volume of black
smoke it slowly emerged from the tunnel, followed by a long
train of carriages, the windows of which were frosted all over by
the cold temperature outside.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_47">[47]</a></span></p>
<p>A man approached the cabin allotted to the plate-layer in
charge of that section of the line in which the tunnel was included.</p>
<p>"I suppose this is the train due at Verrières at 6.55?" he said
carelessly.</p>
<p>"Yes," the plate-layer answered, "but it's late, for the clock
down there in the valley struck seven several minutes ago."</p>
<p>The train had gone by: the three red lamps fastened at the
end of it were already lost in the morning mist.</p>
<p>The man who spoke to the plate-layer was no other than
François Paul, the tramp who had been discharged by the
magistrate installed at the château of Beaulieu, at precisely the
same time the day before, after a brief examination. In spite
of the deep wrinkle furrowed in his brow the man seemed to
make an effort to appear friendly and to want to carry on the
conversation.</p>
<p>"There aren't many people in this morning train," he remarked,
"specially in the first-class carriages."</p>
<p>The plate-layer appeared in no wise unwilling to postpone for
a few moments his tiring and chilly underground patrol; he put
down his pick before answering.</p>
<p>"Well, that's not surprising, is it? People who are rich enough
to travel first-class always come by the express which gets to
Brives at 2.50 <span class="smcap">a.m.</span>"</p>
<p>"I see," said François Paul; "that's reasonable: and more practical
for travellers to Brives or Cahors. But what about the people
who want to get out at Gourdon, or Souillac, or Verrières, or
any of the small stations where the express doesn't stop?"</p>
<p>"I don't know," said the plate-layer; "but I suppose they have
to get out at Brives or Cahors and drive, or else travel by the day
trains, which are fast to Brives and slow afterwards."</p>
<p>François Paul did not press the matter. He lit a pipe and
breathed upon his benumbed fingers.</p>
<p>"Hard times, these, and no mistake!"</p>
<p>The plate-layer seemed sorry for him.</p>
<p>"I don't suppose you're an independent gentleman, but why
don't you try to get taken on here?" he suggested. "They want
hands here."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_48">[48]</a></span></p>
<p>"Oh, do they?"</p>
<p>"That's the fact; this is the foreman coming along now: would
you like me to speak to him for you?"</p>
<p>"No hurry," replied François Paul. "'Course, I'm not saying
no, but I should like to see what sort of work it is they're doing
here: it might not suit me; I shall still have time to get a couple
of words with him," and with his eyes on the ground the tramp
slowly walked along the embankment away from the plate-layer.</p>
<p>The foreman met and passed him, and came up to the plate-layer
at the mouth of the tunnel.</p>
<p>"Well, Michu, how goes it with you? Still got the old complaint?"</p>
<p>"Middling, boss," the worthy fellow answered: "just keeping
up, you know. And how's yourself? And the work? When shall
you finish? I don't know if you know it, but these trains stopping
regularly in my section give me an extra lot of work."</p>
<p>"How's that?" the foreman enquired in surprise.</p>
<p>"The engine drivers take advantage of the stop to empty their
ash-pans, and they leave a great heap of mess there in my tunnel,
which I'm obliged to clear away. In the ordinary way they
dump it somewhere else: where, I don't know, but not in my
tunnel, and that's all I care about."</p>
<p>The foreman laughed.</p>
<p>"You're a good 'un, Michu! If I were you I would ask the
Company to give me another man or two."</p>
<p>"And do you suppose the Company would?" Michu retorted.
"By the way, that poor devil who is going along there, shivering
with cold and hunger, was grumbling to me just now, and I advised
him to ask you to take him on. What do you think he said?
Why, that he would have a look at the work first, and off he
went."</p>
<p>"It's a fact, Michu, that it's mighty difficult to come across
people who mean business nowadays. It's quite true that I want
more hands. But if that chap doesn't ask me to engage him in
another minute, I'll kick him out. The embankment is not public
property, and I don't trust these rascals who are for ever coming
and going among the workmen to see what mischief they can<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_49">[49]</a></span>
make. I'll go and cast an eye over the bolts and things, for there
are all sorts of vagrants about the neighbourhood just now."</p>
<p>"And criminals, too," said old Michu. "I suppose you have
heard of the murder up at the château of Beaulieu?"</p>
<p>"Rather! My men are talking of nothing else. But you are
right, Michu, I will get a closer look at all strangers, and at your
friend in particular."</p>
<p>The foreman stopped abruptly; he had been examining the
foot of the embankment, and was standing quite still, watching.
The plate-layer followed his glance, and also stood fixed. After a
few moments' silence the two men looked at each other and
smiled. In the half-light of the valley they had seen the outline
of a gendarme; he was on foot and appeared to be looking for
somebody, while making no attempt to remain unseen himself.</p>
<p>"Good!" whispered Michu; "that's sergeant Doucet: I know
him by his stripes. They say the murder was not committed by
anyone belonging to this part of the country; everybody was
fond of the Marquise de Langrune."</p>
<p>"Look! Look!" the foreman broke in, pointing to the gendarme
who was slowly climbing up the embankment. "It looks
as if the sergeant were making for the gentleman who was looking
for work just now and hoped he would not find it. The
sergeant's got a word for him, eh, what?"</p>
<p>"That might be," said Michu after a moment's further watching.
"That chap has a villainous, ugly face. One can tell from the
way he's dressed that he don't belong to our parts."</p>
<p>The two men waited with utmost interest to see what was
going to happen.</p>
<p>Sergeant Doucet reached the top of the embankment at last
and hurried past the navvies, who stopped their work to stare inquisitively
after the representative of authority. Fifty yards beyond
them, François Paul, wrapped in thought, was walking
slowly down towards the station of Verrières. Hearing the sound
of steps behind him, he turned. When he saw the sergeant he
frowned. He glanced rapidly about him and saw that while he
was alone with the gendarme, so that no one could overhear
what they said, however loudly they might speak, they were yet<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_50">[50]</a></span>
in such a position that every sign and movement they made
would be perfectly visible to whoever might watch them. And as
the gendarme paused a few paces from him and—remarkable
fact—seemed to be on the point of bringing his hand to his cap
in salute, the mysterious tramp rapped out:</p>
<p>"I thought I said no one was to disturb me, sergeant?"</p>
<p>The sergeant took a pace forward.</p>
<p>"I beg your pardon, Inspector, but I have important news for
you."</p>
<p>For this François Paul, whom the sergeant thus respectfully
addressed as Inspector, was no other than an officer of the secret
police who had been sent down to Beaulieu the day before
from head-quarters in Paris.</p>
<p>He was no ordinary officer. As if M. Havard had had an idea
that the Langrune affair would prove to be puzzling and complicated,
he had singled out the very best of his detectives, the
most expert inspector of them all—Juve. It was Juve who for the
last forty-eight hours had been prowling about the château of
Beaulieu disguised as a tramp, and had had himself arrested
with Bouzille that he might prosecute his own investigations
without raising the slightest suspicion as to his real identity.</p>
<p>Juve made a face expressive of his vexation at the over-deferential
attitude of the sergeant.</p>
<p>"Do pay attention!" he said low. "We are being watched. If I
must go back with you, pretend to arrest me. Slip the handcuffs
on me!"</p>
<p>"I beg your pardon, Inspector: I don't like to," the gendarme
answered.</p>
<p>For all reply, Juve turned his back on him.</p>
<p>"Look here," he said, "I will take a step or two forward as if I
meant to run away; then you must put your hand on my shoulder
roughly, and I will stumble; when I do, slip the bracelets
on."</p>
<p>From the mouth of the tunnel the plate-layer, the foreman
and the navvies all followed with their eyes the unintelligible
conversation passing between the gendarme and the tramp a
hundred yards away. Suddenly they saw the man try to get off<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_51">[51]</a></span>
and the sergeant seize him almost simultaneously. A few minutes
later the individual, with his hands linked together in front
of him, was obediently descending the steep slope of the embankment,
by the gendarme's side, and then the two men disappeared
behind a clump of trees.</p>
<p>"I understand why that chap was not very keen on getting
taken on here," said the foreman. "His conscience was none too
easy!"</p>
<p>As they walked briskly in the direction of Beaulieu Juve asked
the sergeant:</p>
<p>"What has happened at the château, then?"</p>
<p>"They know who the murderer is, Inspector," the sergeant answered.
"Little Mlle. Thérèse——"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_52">[52]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">VI. "Fantômas, it is Death!"</span></h2>
<p>Hurrying back towards the château with the sergeant, Juve
ran into M. de Presles outside the park gate. The magistrate
had just arrived from Brives in a motor-car which he had
commandeered for his personal use during the last few days.</p>
<p>"Well," said Juve in his quiet, measured tones, "have you
heard the news?" And as the magistrate looked at him in surprise
he went on: "I gather from your expression that you have
not. Well, sir, if you will kindly fill up a warrant we will arrest M.
Charles Rambert."</p>
<p>Juve briefly repeated to the magistrate what the sergeant had
reported to him, and the sergeant added a few further details.
The three men had now reached the foot of the steps before the
house and were about to go up when the door of the château
was opened and Dollon appeared. He hurried towards them,
with unkempt hair and haggard face, and excitedly exclaimed:</p>
<p>"Didn't you meet the Ramberts? Where are they? Where are
they?"</p>
<p>The magistrate, who was bewildered by what Juve had told
him, was trying to form a coherent idea of the whole sequence
of events, but the detective realised the situation at once, and
turned to the sergeant.</p>
<p>"The bird has flown," he said. The sergeant threw up his
hands in dismay.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Inside the hall Juve and M. de Presles ordered Dollon to give
them an exact account of the discovery made by Thérèse in the
course of the previous night.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_53">[53]</a></span></p>
<p>"Well, gentlemen," said the old fellow, who was greatly upset
by the discovery of the murderer of the Marquise de Langrune,
"when I got to the château early this morning I found the two
old servants, Marie and Louise, entirely occupied attending to
the young mistress. Marie slept in an adjoining room to hers last
night, and was awakened about five o'clock by the poor child's
inarticulate cries. Mlle. Thérèse was bathed in perspiration; her
face was all drawn and there were dark rings under her eyes; she
was sleeping badly and evidently having a dreadful nightmare.
She half woke up several times and muttered some unintelligible
words to Marie, who thought that it was the result of over-excitement.
But about six o'clock, just as I arrived, Mlle.
Thérèse really woke up, and bursting into a fit of sobbing and
crying, repeated the names of her grandmother and the
Ramberts and the Baronne de Vibray. She kept on saying, 'The
murderer! the murderer!' and making all sorts of signs of terror,
but we were not able to get from her a clear statement of what
it was all about. I felt her pulse and found she was very feverish,
and Louise prepared a cooling drink, which she persuaded her
to take. In about twenty minutes—it was then nearly half-past
six—Mlle. Thérèse quietened down, and managed to tell us
what she had heard during the night, and the dreadful interview
and conversation between M. Rambert and his son which she
had seen and overheard."</p>
<p>"What did you do then?" enquired M. de Presles.</p>
<p>"I was dreadfully upset myself, sir, and I sent Jean, the coachman,
to Saint-Jaury to fetch the doctor and also to let Sergeant
Doucet know. Sergeant Doucet got here first; I told him all I knew,
and then I went upstairs with the doctor to see Mlle. Thérèse."</p>
<p>The magistrate turned to the police-sergeant and questioned
him.</p>
<p>"Directly M. Dollon told me his story," the sergeant replied,
"I thought it my duty to report to M. Juve, who I knew was not
far from the château, on his way to Verrières: M. Juve told me
last night that he meant to explore that part in the early morning.
I left Morand on duty at the entrance to the château, with
orders to prevent either of the Ramberts from leaving."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_54">[54]</a></span></p>
<p>"And Morand did not see them going away?" the magistrate
asked.</p>
<p>Juve had already divined what had happened, and replied for
the sergeant.</p>
<p>"Morand did not see them go out for the obvious reason that
they had left long before—in the middle of the night, directly
after their altercation: in a word, before Mlle. Thérèse woke up."
He turned to the sergeant. "What has been done since then?"</p>
<p>"Nothing, Inspector."</p>
<p>"Well, sergeant," said Juve. "I imagine his worship will order
you to send out your men at once after the runaways." As a matter
of courtesy he glanced at the magistrate as if asking for his
approval, but he only did so out of politeness, for he took it for
granted.</p>
<p>"Of course!" said the magistrate; "please do so at once." The
sergeant turned on his heel and left the hall.</p>
<p>"Where is Mlle. Thérèse?" M. de Presles asked Dollon, who
was standing nervously apart.</p>
<p>"She is sleeping quietly just now, sir," said the steward, coming
forward. "The doctor is with her, and would rather she were
not disturbed, if you have no objection."</p>
<p>"Very well," said the magistrate. "Leave us, please," and
Dollon also went away.</p>
<p>Juve and M. de Presles looked at one another. The magistrate
was the first to break the silence.</p>
<p>"So it is finished?" he remarked. "So this Charles Rambert is
the culprit?"</p>
<p>Juve shook his head.</p>
<p>"Charles Rambert? Well, he ought to be the culprit."</p>
<p>"Why that reservation?" enquired the magistrate.</p>
<p>"I say 'ought to be,' for all the circumstances point to that conclusion,
and yet in my bones I don't believe he is."</p>
<p>"Surely the presumptions of his guilt, his pseudo-confession,
or at least his silence in face of his father's formal accusation,
may make us sure he is," said M. de Presles.</p>
<p>"There are some presumptions in favour of his innocence
too," Juve replied, but with a slight hesitation.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_55">[55]</a></span></p>
<p>The magistrate pressed his point.</p>
<p>"Your investigations formally demonstrated the fact that the
crime was committed by some person who was inside the
house."</p>
<p>"Possibly," said Juve, "but not certainly. The probabilities do
not allow us to assert it as a fact."</p>
<p>"Explain yourself."</p>
<p>"Not so fast, sir," Juve replied, and getting up he added:
"There is nothing for us to do here, sir; shall we go up to the
room Charles Rambert occupied?"</p>
<p>M. de Presles followed the detective, and the two men went
into the room, which was as plainly furnished as that of any
young girl. The magistrate installed himself comfortably in an
easy chair and lighted a cigar, while Juve walked up and down,
scrutinising everything with quick, sharp glances, and began to
talk:</p>
<p>"I said 'not so fast' just now, sir, and I will tell you why: in my
opinion there are two preliminary points in this affair which it is
important to clear up: the nature of the crime, and the motive
which can have actuated the criminal. Let us take up these two
points, and first of all ask ourselves how the murder of the
Marquise de Langrune ought to be 'classified' in the technical
sense. The first conclusion which must be impressed upon the
mind of any observant person who has visited the scene of the
crime and examined the corpse of the victim is, that this murder
must be placed in the category of crapulous crimes. The murderer
seems to have left the implicit mark of his character upon
his victim; the very violence of the blows dealt shows that he is
a man of the lower orders, a typical criminal, a professional."</p>
<p>"What do you deduce that from?" M. de Presles enquired.</p>
<p>"Simply from the nature of the wound. You saw it, as I did.
Mme. de Langrune's throat was almost entirely severed by the
blade of some cutting instrument. The breadth and depth of the
wound absolutely prove that it was not made with one stroke;
the murderer must have gone amok and dealt several blows—have
gone on striking even when death had finished his work, or
at least was quite inevitable; that shows clearly that the mur<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_56">[56]</a></span>derer
belongs to a class of individuals who feel no repugnance
for their horrid work, but who kill without horror, and even
without excitement. Again, the nature of the wound shows that
the murderer is a strong man; you no doubt know that weak
men with feeble muscles strike 'deep' by choice, that is to say
with a pointed weapon and aiming at a vital organ, whereas powerful
murderers have a predilection for blows dealt 'superficially,'
and for broad, ghastly wounds. Besides, that is only
following a natural law; a weak man finesses with death, tries to
make sure of it at some precise point, penetrating the heart or
severing an artery; a brutal man does not care where he hits, but
trusts to his own brute strength to achieve his purpose.</p>
<p>"We have next to determine the sort of weapon with which
the murder was committed. We have not got it, at any rate up
to the present; I have given orders for the drains to be emptied,
and the pond to be dragged and the shrubberies to be
searched, but, whether our search is crowned with success or
not, I am convinced that the instrument was a knife, one of
those common knives with a catch lock that apaches always
carry. If the murderer had had a weapon whose point was its
principal danger, he would have stabbed, and stabbed to the
heart, instead of cutting; but he used the edge, the part of a
knife that is most habitually used, and he actually cut. When
the first wound was made he did not strike anywhere else, but
continued working away at the wound and enlarging it. It is a
point of capital importance that this murder was committed
with a knife, not with a dagger or stiletto, and therefore this is
a crapulous crime."</p>
<p>"And what conclusion do you draw from the fact that the
crime is a crapulous one?" the magistrate proceeded to enquire.</p>
<p>"Merely that it cannot have been committed by Charles
Rambert," Juve answered very gravely. "He is a young man who
has been well brought up, he comes of very good stock, and his
age makes it most improbable that he can be a professional
criminal."</p>
<p>"Obviously, obviously!" murmured the magistrate, not a little
embarrassed by the keen logic of the detective.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_57">[57]</a></span></p>
<p>"And now let us consider the motive or motives of the crime,"
Juve continued. "Why did the man commit this murder?"</p>
<p>"Doubtless for purposes of robbery," said the magistrate.</p>
<p>"What did he want to steal?" Juve retorted. "As a matter of
fact, Mme. de Langrune's diamond rings and watch and purse
were all found on her table, in full view of everybody; in the
drawers that had been broken open I found other jewels, over
twenty pounds in gold and silver, and three bank-notes in a card-case.
What is your view, sir, of a crapulous robber who sees valuables
like that within his reach, and who does not take them?"</p>
<p>"It is certainly surprising," the magistrate admitted.</p>
<p>"Very surprising; and goes to show that although the crime in
itself is a common, sordid one, the criminal may have had
higher, or at any rate different, aspirations from those which
would lead an ordinary ruffian to commit murder for the sake of
robbery. The age and social position and personality of Mme. de
Langrune make it very unlikely that she had enemies, or was the
object of vengeance, and therefore if she was got rid of, it was
very likely that she might be robbed—but robbed of what? Was
there something more important than money or jewels to be
got? I frankly admit that although I put the question I am at a
loss how to answer it."</p>
<p>"Obviously," murmured the magistrate again, still more puzzled
by all these logical deductions.</p>
<p>Juve proceeded with the development of his ideas.</p>
<p>"And now suppose we are face to face with a crime committed
without any motive, as a result of some morbid impulse, a by
no means uncommon occurrence, monomania or temporary
insanity?</p>
<p>"In that case, although, in consequence of the crapulous nature
of the crime, I had previously dismissed the very serious
presumption of guilt attaching to young Rambert, I should be
inclined to reconsider my opinion and think it possible that he
might be the culprit. We know very little about the young fellow
from the physiological point of view; in fact we don't know him
at all; but it seems that his family is not altogether normal, and
I understand that his mother's mental condition is precarious. If<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_58">[58]</a></span>
for a moment we regard Charles Rambert as a hysterical subject,
we can associate him with the murder of the Marquise de
Langrune without thereby destroying our case that the crime is
a crapulous one, for a man of only medium physical strength,
when suffering from an attack of mental alienation, has his muscular
power increased at least tenfold during his paroxysms.
Under such influence as that Charles Rambert might have committed
murder with all the fierce brutality of a giant!</p>
<p>"But I shall soon be in possession of absolutely accurate
knowledge as to the muscular strength of the murderer," Juve
proceeded. "Quite lately M. Bertillon invented a marvellous dynamometer
which enables us not only to ascertain what kind of
lever has been used to force a lock or a piece of furniture, but
also to determine the exact strength of the individual who used
the tools. I have taken samples of the wood from the broken
drawer, and I shall soon have exact information."</p>
<p>"That will be immensely important," M. de Presles agreed.
"Even if it does away with our present certainty of Charles
Rambert's guilt, we shall be able to find out whether the murder
was committed by any other occupant of the house—still
assuming that it was committed by some member of the household."</p>
<p>"With regard to that," said Juve, "we can proceed with our
method of deduction and eliminate from our field of observation
everybody who has a good alibi or other defence; it will be
so much ground cleared. For my own part I find it impossible to
suspect the two old maidservants, Louise and Marie; the tramps
whom we have detained and subsequently released are too
simple-minded, elementary people to have been capable of devising
the minute precautions which demonstrate the subtle
cleverness of the man who murdered the Marquise. Then there
is Dollon; but I imagine you will agree with me in thinking that
his alibi removes him from suspicion—more especially as the
medical evidence proves that the murder was committed during
the night, between two and three o'clock."</p>
<p>"Only M. Etienne Rambert is left," the magistrate put in,
"and about nine o'clock that evening he left the d'Orsay station<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_59">[59]</a></span>
in the slow train which reaches Verrières at 6.55 <span class="smcap">a.m.</span> He spent
the whole night in the train, for he certainly arrived by that one.
He could not have a better alibi."</p>
<p>"Not possibly," Juve replied. "So we need only trouble ourselves
with Charles Rambert," and warming up to the subject
the detective proceeded to pile up a crushing indictment against
the young man. "The crime was committed so quietly that not
the faintest sound was heard; therefore the murderer was in the
house; he went to the Marquise's room and announced his arrival
by a cautious tap on the door; the Marquise then opened
the door to him, and was not surprised to see him, for she knew
him quite well; he went into her room with her and——"</p>
<p>"Oh, come, come!" M. de Presles broke in; "you are romancing
now, M. Juve; you forget that the bedroom door was forced,
the best proof of that being the bolt, which was found wrenched
away and hanging literally at the end of the screws."</p>
<p>"I was expecting you to say that, sir," said Juve with a smile.
"But before I reply I should like to show you something rather
quaint." He led the way across the passage and went into the
bedroom of the Marquise, where order had now been restored;
the dead body had been removed to the library, which was
transformed into a <i>chapelle ardente</i>, and two nuns were watching
over it there. "Have a good look at this bolt," he said to M.
de Presles. "Is there anything unusual about it?"</p>
<p>"No," said the magistrate.</p>
<p>"Yes, there is," said Juve; "the slide-bolt is out, as when the bolt
is fastened, but the socket into which the slide-bolt slips to fasten
the door to the wall is intact. If the bolt really had been forced,
the socket would have been wrenched away too." Juve next asked
M. de Presles to look closely at the screws that were wrenched
halfway out of the door. "Do you see anything on those?"</p>
<p>The magistrate pointed to their heads.</p>
<p>"There are tiny scratches on them," he said, rather hesitatingly,
for in his inmost heart he knew the detective's real superiority
over himself, "and from those I must infer that the screws
have not been wrenched out by the pressure exerted on the
bolt, but really unscrewed, and therefore——"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_60">[60]</a></span></p>
<p>"And therefore," Juve broke in, "this is a mere blind, from
which we may certainly draw the conclusion that the murderer
wished to make us believe that the door was forced, whereas in
reality it was opened to him by the Marquise. Therefore the
murderer was personally known to her!"</p>
<p>"The murderer was personally known to her," he repeated.
"Now I should like to remind you of young Charles Rambert's
equivocal behaviour in the course of the evening that preceded
the crime. It struck President Bonnet and shocked the priest. I
also recall his hereditary antecedents, his mothers insanity, and
finally——" Juve broke off abruptly and unceremoniously
dragged the magistrate out of the room and into Charles
Rambert's bedroom. He hurried into the dressing-room adjoining,
went down on his knees on the floor, and laid a finger on the
middle of the oil-cloth that was laid over the boards. "What do
you see there, sir?" he demanded.</p>
<p>The magistrate adjusted his eyeglass and, looking at the place
indicated by the detective, saw a little black stain; he wetted his
finger, rubbed it on the spot, and then, holding up his hand, observed
that the tip of his finger was stained red.</p>
<p>"It is blood," he muttered.</p>
<p>"Yes, blood," said Juve, "and I gather from this that the story
of the blood-stained towel which M. Rambert senior found
among his son's things, and the sight of which so greatly impressed
Mlle. Thérèse, was not an invention on that young lady's
part, but really existed; and it forms the most damning evidence
possible against the young man. He obviously washed his hands
after the crime in the water from the tap over this wash-hand
basin here, but one drop of blood falling on the towel and dripping
on to the floor has been enough to give him away."</p>
<p>The magistrate nodded.</p>
<p>"It is conclusive," he said. "You have just proved to demonstration,
M. Juve, that Charles Rambert is the guilty party. It is
beyond argument. It is conclusive—conclusive!"</p>
<p>There were a couple of seconds of silence, and then Juve suddenly
said "No!"</p>
<p>"No!" he repeated; "it is quite true that we can adduce per<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_61">[61]</a></span>fectly
logical arguments to show that the murder was committed
by some member of the household and that, therefore, Charles
Rambert is the only possible culprit; but we can adduce equally
logical arguments to show that the crime was committed by
some person who got in from outside: there is nothing to prove
that he did not walk into the house through the front door."</p>
<p>"The door was locked," said the magistrate.</p>
<p>"That's nothing," said Juve with a laugh. "Don't forget that
there isn't such a thing as a real safety lock nowadays—since all
locks can be opened with an outside key. If I had found one of
the good old-fashioned catch locks on the door, such as they
used to make years ago, I should have said to you: nobody got
in, because the only way to get through a door fastened with one
of those locks is to break the door down. But here we have a lock
that can be opened with a key. Now the key does not exist of
which one cannot get an impression, and there is not such a
thing as an impression from which one cannot manufacture a
false key. The murderer could easily have got into the house
with a duplicate key."</p>
<p>The magistrate raised a further objection.</p>
<p>"If the murderer had got in from outside he would inevitably
have left some traces round about the château, but there aren't
any."</p>
<p>"Yes there are," Juve retorted. "First of all there is this piece
of an ordnance map which I found yesterday between the
château and the embankment." He took it from his pocket as he
spoke. "It is an odd coincidence that this scrap shows the neighbourhood
of the château of Beaulieu."</p>
<p>"That doesn't prove anything," said the magistrate. "To find a
piece of a map of our district in our district is the most natural
thing possible. Now if you were to discover the rest of this map
in anybody's possession, then——"</p>
<p>"You may rest assured that I shall try to do so with the least
possible delay," said Juve gently. "But this is not the only argument
I have to support my theory. This morning, when I was
walking near the embankment, I found some very suspicious
footprints. It is true there are any number of footprints near the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_62">[62]</a></span>
end of the Verrières tunnel, where the navvies are at work. But
at the other end of the tunnel, where there is no occasion for
anyone to pass by, I found that the earth of the embankment,
which was crisp with the frost, had been disturbed, showing that
someone had clambered up the embankment; the tips of his
shoes had been driven into the earth, and I could see distinctly
where his feet had been placed; but unfortunately the soil there
is so dry that the footprints were too faint for me to hope to be
able to identify the maker of them. But the fact remains that
someone did climb up the embankment, someone who was
making for the railway."</p>
<p>The magistrate did not seem to be impressed by Juve's discovery.</p>
<p>"And pray what conclusion do you think ought to be drawn
from that?" he enquired.</p>
<p>Juve sat down in an easy chair, threw back his head and closed
his eyes as if he were about to indulge in a long soliloquy, and
began to express his thoughts aloud.</p>
<p>"Suppose we were to combine the two hypotheses into one;
to wit, that the murderer was in the château prior to the accomplishment
of the crime and left the château directly it was
accomplished. What should you say, sir, of a criminal completing
his deed, then hurrying over the couple of miles that separate
Beaulieu from the railway, and catching a passing train, and
on his way climbing the embankment at the spot where I found
the footprints I mentioned."</p>
<p>"I should say," the magistrate replied, "that you can't jump into
a moving train as you can into a passing tram, and further, that at
night none but express trains run between Brives and Cahors."</p>
<p>"All right," said Juve: "I will merely point out that owing to
the work on the line at present, all trains have stopped at the beginning
of the tunnel for the last two months. If the murderer
had planned to escape in that way he might very well have been
aware of this regular stoppage."</p>
<p>The magistrates confidence was a little shaken by these new
deductions on the part of the detective, but he submitted yet another
objection.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_63">[63]</a></span></p>
<p>"We have not found any traces round about the château."</p>
<p>"Strictly speaking, no, we have not," Juve admitted; "but it is
clear that if the murderer walked on the grass, and he probably
did so, he walked on it during the night, that is to say, before the
morning dew. Now everybody knows that when the dew rises in
the early morning, grass that has been bent down by any passing
man or animal, stands up again in its original position,
thereby destroying all traces; so if the murderer did walk on the
lawn when he was getting away, nobody could tell that he had
done so. Nevertheless, on the lawn in front of the window of the
room where the murder was committed I have observed, not exactly
footprints, but signs that the earth has been disturbed at
that spot. I imagine that if I were to jump out of a first floor window
on to the soft surface of a lawn, and wanted to efface the
marks of my boots, I should smooth the earth and the grass
around them in just the same way that the little piece of lawn I
speak of seems to have been smoothed."</p>
<p>"I should like to have a look at that," said M. de Presles.</p>
<p>"Well, there's no difficulty about it," Juve replied. "Come
along."</p>
<p>The two men hurried down the staircase and out of the
house. When they reached the patch of grass which the inspector
said had been "made up," they crouched down and scrutinised
it closely. Just by the side of the grass, even overhanging it
a little, a large rhubarb plant outspread its thick, dentelated
leaves almost parallel with the soil. Juve happened to glance casually
at the nearest leaf, and uttered an exclamation of surprise
and gratification.</p>
<p>"Gad, here's something interesting!" and he drew the magistrate's
attention to some little pilules of earth with which the
plant was peppered.</p>
<p>"What is that?" enquired M. de Presles.</p>
<p>"Earth," said Juve, who had swept the top of the leaf with the
palm of his hand; "ordinary earth, like the rest ten inches below,
on the grass."</p>
<p>"Well, what about it?" said the puzzled magistrate.</p>
<p>"Well," said Juve with a smile, "I imagine that ordinary earth,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_64">[64]</a></span>
or any kind of earth, has no power to move of its own volition,
much less to jump up ten inches into the air and settle on the
top of a leaf, even a rhubarb leaf! So I conclude that since this
earth did not get here by itself it was brought here. How? That
is very simple! Somebody has jumped on to the grass there, M.
de Presles; he has removed the marks of his feet by smoothing
the earth with his hands; the earth soiled his hands, and he
rubbed one against the other quite mechanically; the earth
which was on his hands fell off in little balls on to the rhubarb
leaf, and remained there for us to discover. And so it is certain—this
is one proof more—that even if the murderer did not get in
from outside, he did at any rate take to flight after he had committed
the crime."</p>
<p>"So it can't be Charles Rambert after all," said the magistrate.</p>
<p>"It 'ought to be' Charles Rambert!" was Juve's baffling reply.</p>
<p>The magistrate waxed irritable.</p>
<p>"My dear sir, your everlasting contradictions end by being
rather absurd! You have hardly finished building up one laborious
theory before you start knocking it down again. I fail to understand
you."</p>
<p>Juve smiled at M. de Presles' sudden irritability, but quickly
became grave again.</p>
<p>"I am anxious not to be led away by any preconceived opinion.
I put the hypothesis that so and so is guilty, and examine all
the arguments in support of that theory; then I submit that the
crime was committed by somebody else, and proceed in the
same way. My method certainly has the objection that it confronts
every argument with a diametrically opposite one, but we
are not concerned with establishing any one case in preference
to another—it is the truth, and nothing else, that we have to discover."</p>
<p>"And that is tantamount to saying that in spite of the overwhelming
circumstantial evidence, and in spite of the fact that
he has run away, Charles Rambert is innocent?"</p>
<p>"Charles Rambert is the culprit, sir," Juve replied brightly. "If
he were not, whom else could we possibly suspect?"</p>
<p>The detective's placidity and his perpetual self-contradictions<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_65">[65]</a></span>
exasperated M. de Presles. He held his tongue, and was silently
revolving the case in his mind when Juve made yet one more
suggestion.</p>
<p>"There is one final hypothesis which I feel obliged to put before
you. Do you realise, sir, that this is a typical Fantômas
crime?"</p>
<p>M. de Presles shrugged his shoulders as the detective pronounced
this half-mythical name.</p>
<p>"Upon my word, M. Juve, I should never have expected you
to invoke Fantômas! Why, Fantômas is the too obvious subterfuge,
the cheapest device for investing a case with mock honours.
Between you and me, you know perfectly well that
Fantômas is merely a legal fiction—a lawyers' joke. Fantômas
has no existence in fact!"</p>
<p>Juve stopped in his stride. He paused a moment before
replying; then spoke in a restrained voice, but with an emphasis
on his words that always marked him when he spoke in all seriousness.</p>
<p>"You are wrong to laugh, sir; very wrong. You are a magistrate
and I am only a humble detective inspector, but you have three
or four years' experience, perhaps less, while I have fifteen
years' work behind me. I know that Fantômas does exist, and I
do anything but laugh when I suspect his intervention in a case."</p>
<p>M. de Presles could hardly conceal his surprise, and Juve
went on:</p>
<p>"No one has ever said of me, sir, that I was a coward. I have
looked death in the eyes; I have often hunted and arrested criminals
who would not have had the least hesitation in doing away
with me. There are whole gangs of rascals who have vowed my
death. All manner of horrible revenges threaten me to-day. For
all that I have the most complete indifference! But when people
talk to me of Fantômas, when I fancy that I can detect the intervention
of that genius of crime in any case, then, M. de
Presles, I am in a funk! I tell you frankly I am in a funk. I am
frightened, because Fantômas is a being against whom it is idle
to use ordinary weapons; because he has been able to hide his
identity and elude all pursuit for years; because his daring is<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_66">[66]</a></span>
boundless and his power unmeasurable; because he is everywhere
and nowhere at once and, if he has had a hand in this affair,
I am not even sure that he is not listening to me now! And
finally, M. de Presles, because every one whom I have known to
attack Fantômas, my friends, my colleagues, my superior officers,
have one and all, one and all, sir, been beaten in the fight!
Fantômas does exist, I know, but who is he? A man can brave a
danger he can measure, but he trembles when confronted with
a peril he suspects but cannot see."</p>
<p>"But this Fantômas is not a devil," the magistrate broke in
testily; "he is a man like you and me!"</p>
<p>"You are right, sir, in saying he is a man; but I repeat, the man
is a genius! I don't know whether he works alone or whether he
is the head of a gang of criminals; I know nothing of his life; I
know nothing of his object. In no single case yet has it been possible
to determine the exact part he has taken. He seems to possess
the extraordinary gift of being able to slay and leave no
trace. You don't see him; you divine his presence: you don't hear
him; you have a presentiment of him. If Fantômas is mixed up
in this present affair, I don't know if we ever shall succeed in
clearing it up!"</p>
<p>M. de Presles was impressed in spite of himself by the detective's
earnestness.</p>
<p>"But I suppose you are not recommending me to drop the enquiry,
are you, Juve?"</p>
<p>The detective forced a laugh that did not ring quite true.</p>
<p>"Come, come, sir," he answered, "I told you just now that I
was frightened, but I never said I was a coward. You may be
quite sure I shall do my duty, to the very end. When I first
began—and that was not yesterday, nor yet the day before—to
realise the importance and the power of this Fantômas, I took
an oath, sir, that some day I would discover his identity and effect
his arrest! Fantômas is an enemy of society, you say? I prefer
to regard him first and foremost as my own personal enemy!
I have declared war on him, and I am ready to lose my skin in
the war if necessary, but by God I'll have his!"</p>
<p>Juve ceased. M. de Presles also was silent. But the magistrate<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_67">[67]</a></span>
was still sceptical, despite the detective's strange utterance, and
presently he could not refrain from making a gentle protest and
appeal.</p>
<p>"Do please bring in a verdict against someone, M. Juve, for
really I would rather believe that your Fantômas is—a creation
of the imagination!"</p>
<p>Juve shrugged his shoulders, seemed to be arriving at a
mighty decision, and began:</p>
<p>"You are quite right, sir, to require me to draw some definite
conclusion, even if you are not right in denying the existence of
Fantômas. So I make the assertion that the murderer is——"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>The sound of hurrying steps behind them made both men
turn round. A postman, hot and perspiring, was hurrying to the
château; he had a telegram in his hand.</p>
<p>"Does either of you gentlemen know M. Juve?" he asked.</p>
<p>"My name is Juve," said the detective, and he took the
telegram and tore the envelope open. He glanced through it and
then handed it to the magistrate.</p>
<p>"Please read that, sir," he said.</p>
<p>The telegram was from the Criminal Investigation
Department, and ran as follows:</p>
<div class="blockquot"><p>"Return immediately to Paris. Are convinced that extraordinary
crime lies behind disappearance of Lord Beltham.
Privately, suspect Fantômas' work."</p></div>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_68">[68]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">VII. The Criminal Investigation Department</span></h2>
<p>"Does M. Gurn live here, please?"</p>
<p>Mme. Doulenques, the concierge at No. 147 rue Lévert,
looked at the enquirer and saw a tall, dark man with a heavy
moustache, wearing a soft hat and a tightly buttoned overcoat,
the collar of which was turned up to his ears.</p>
<p>"M. Gurn is away, sir," she answered; "he has been away for
some little time."</p>
<p>"I know," said the stranger, "but still I want to go up to his
rooms if you will kindly go with me."</p>
<p>"You want——" the concierge began in surprise and doubt.
"Oh, I know; of course you are the man from the what's-its-name
company, come for his luggage? Wait a bit; what is the
name of that company? Something funny—an English name, I
fancy."</p>
<p>The woman left the door, which she had been holding just
ajar, and went to the back of her lodge; she looked through the
pigeon-holes where she kept the tenants' letters ready sorted,
and picked out a soiled printed circular addressed to M. Gurn.
She was busy putting on her spectacles when the stranger drew
near and from over her shoulder got a glimpse of the name for
which she was looking. He drew back again noiselessly, and said
quietly:</p>
<p>"I have come from the South Steamship Company."</p>
<p>"Yes, that's it," said the concierge, laboriously spelling out the
words: "the South—what you said. I can never pronounce those
names. Rue d'Hauteville, isn't it?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_69">[69]</a></span></p>
<p>"That's it," replied the man in the soft hat in pleasant, measured
tones.</p>
<p>"Well, it's very plain that you don't bustle much in your place,"
the concierge remarked. "I've been expecting you to come for
M. Gurn's things for nearly three weeks; he told me you would
come a few days after he had gone. However, that's your
business."</p>
<p>Mme. Doulenques cast a mechanical glance through the window
that looked on to the street, and then surveyed the stranger
from top to toe; he seemed to be much too well dressed to be a
mere porter.</p>
<p>"But you haven't got any handcart or truck," she exclaimed.
"You're not thinking of carrying the trunks on your shoulder, are
you? Why, there are at least three or four of them—and heavy!"</p>
<p>The stranger paused before answering, as though he found it
necessary to weigh each word.</p>
<p>"As a matter of fact I merely wanted to get an idea of the size
of the luggage," he said quietly. "Will you show me the things?"</p>
<p>"If I must, I must," said the concierge with a heavy sigh.
"Come up with me: it's the fifth floor," and as she climbed the
stairs she grumbled: "It's a pity you didn't come when I was
doing my work: I shouldn't have had to climb a hundred stairs a
second time then; it counts up at the end of the day, and I'm not
so young as I was."</p>
<p>The stranger followed her up the stairs, murmuring monosyllabic
sympathy, and regulating his pace by hers. Arrived at the
fifth floor, the concierge drew a key from her pocket and
opened the door of the flat.</p>
<p>It was a small modest place, but quite prettily decorated. The
door on the landing opened into a tiny sort of anteroom, from
which one passed into a front room furnished with little but a
round table and a few arm-chairs. Beyond this was a bedroom,
almost filled by the large bed, which was the first thing one saw
on entering, and on the right there was yet another room, probably
a little office. Both the first room, which was a kind of
general living room, and the bedroom had wide windows overlooking
gardens as far as one could see. An advantage of the flat<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_70">[70]</a></span>
was that it had nothing opposite, so that the occupant could
move about with the windows open if he liked, and yet have
nothing to fear from the inquisitiveness of neighbours.</p>
<p>The rooms had been shut up for several days, since the tenant
had gone away indeed, and there was a stuffy smell about
them, mingled with a strong smell of chemicals.</p>
<p>"I must air the place," the concierge muttered, "or else M.
Gurn won't be pleased when he comes back. He always says he
is too hot and can't breathe in Paris."</p>
<p>"So he does not live here regularly?" said the stranger, scanning
the place curiously as he spoke.</p>
<p>"Oh, no, sir," the concierge answered. "M. Gurn is a kind of
commercial traveller and is often away, sometimes for a month
or six weeks together," and the gossiping woman was beginning
a long and incoherent story when the stranger interrupted her,
pointing to a silver-framed photograph of a young woman he
had noticed on the mantelpiece.</p>
<p>"Is that Mme. Gurn?"</p>
<p>"M. Gurn is a bachelor," Mme. Doulenques replied. "I can't
fancy him married, with his roaming kind of life."</p>
<p>"Just a little friend of his, eh?" said the man in the soft hat,
with a wink and a meaning smile.</p>
<p>"Oh, no," said the concierge, shaking her head. "That photograph
is not a bit like her."</p>
<p>"So you know her, then?"</p>
<p>"I do and I don't. That's to say, when M. Gurn is in Paris, he
often has visits from a lady in the afternoon: a very fashionable
lady, I can tell you, not the sort that one often sees in this quarter.
Why, the woman who comes is a society lady, I am sure: she
always has her veil down and passes by my lodge ever so fast, and
never has any conversation with me; free with her money, too: it's
very seldom she does not give me something when she comes."</p>
<p>The stranger seemed to find the concierge's communications
very interesting, but they did not interrupt his mental inventory
of the room.</p>
<p>"In other words, your tenant does not keep too sharp an eye
on his money?" he suggested.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_71">[71]</a></span></p>
<p>"No, indeed: the rent is always paid in advance, and sometimes
M. Gurn even pays two terms in advance because he says
he never can tell if his business won't be keeping him away when
the rent falls due."</p>
<p>Just then a deep voice called up the staircase:</p>
<p>"Concierge: M. Gurn: have you any one of that name in the
house?"</p>
<p>"Come up to the fifth floor," the concierge called back to the
man. "I am in his rooms now," and she went back into the flat.
"Here's somebody else for M. Gurn," she exclaimed.</p>
<p>"Does he have many visitors?" the stranger enquired.</p>
<p>"Hardly any, sir: that's why I'm so surprised."</p>
<p>Two men appeared; their blue blouses and metal-peaked caps
proclaimed them to be porters. The concierge turned to the
man in the soft hat.</p>
<p>"I suppose these are your men, come to fetch the trunks?"</p>
<p>The stranger made a slight grimace, seemed to hesitate and
finally made up his mind to remain silent.</p>
<p>Rather surprised to see that the three men did not seem to be
acquainted with each other, the concierge was about to ask what
it meant, when one of the porters addressed her curtly:</p>
<p>"We've come from the South Steamship Company for four
boxes from M. Gurn's place. Are those the ones?" and taking no
notice of the visitor in the room, the man pointed to two large
trunks and two small boxes which were placed in a corner of the
room.</p>
<p>"But aren't you three all together?" enquired Mme.
Doulenques, visibly uneasy.</p>
<p>The stranger still remained silent, but the first porter replied
at once.</p>
<p>"No; we have nothing to do with the gentleman. Get on to it,
mate! We've no time to waste!"</p>
<p>Anticipating their action, the concierge got instinctively between
the porters and the luggage: so too did the man in the soft
hat.</p>
<p>"Pardon," said he politely but peremptorily. "Please take
nothing away."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_72">[72]</a></span></p>
<p>One of the porters drew a crumpled and dirty memorandum
book from his pocket and turned over the pages, wetting his
thumb every time. He looked at it attentively and then spoke.</p>
<p>"There's no mistake: this is where we were told to come," and
again he signed to his mate. "Let's get on with it!"</p>
<p>The concierge was puzzled. She looked first at the mysterious
stranger, who was as quiet and silent as ever, and then at the
porters, who were beginning to be irritated by these incomprehensible
complications.</p>
<p>Mme. Doulenques' mistrust waxed greater, and she sincerely
regretted being alone on the fifth floor with these strangers, for
the other occupants of this floor had gone off to their daily work
long ago. Suddenly she escaped from the room, and called
shrilly down the stairs:</p>
<p>"Madame Aurore! Madame Aurore!"</p>
<p>The man in the soft hat rushed after her, seized her gently but
firmly by the arm, and led her back into the room.</p>
<p>"I beg you, madame, make no noise: do not call out!" he said
in a low tone. "Everything will be all right. I only ask you not to
create a disturbance."</p>
<p>But the concierge was thoroughly alarmed by the really odd
behaviour of all these men, and again screamed at the top of her
voice:</p>
<p>"Help! Police!"</p>
<p>The first porter was exasperated.</p>
<p>"It's unfortunate to be taken for thieves," he said with a shrug
of his shoulders. "Look here, Auguste, just run down to the corner
of the street and bring back a gendarme. The gentleman can
explain to the concierge in his presence, and then we shall be at
liberty to get on with our job."</p>
<p>Auguste hastened to obey, and several tense moments passed,
during which not a single word was exchanged between the
three people who were left together.</p>
<p>Then heavy steps were heard, and Auguste reappeared with a
gendarme. The latter came swaggering into the room with a
would-be majestic air, and solemnly and pompously enquired:</p>
<p>"Now then, what's all this about?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_73">[73]</a></span></p>
<p>At sight of the officer every countenance cleared. The
concierge ceased to tremble; the porter lost his air of suspicion.
Both were beginning to explain to the representative of authority,
when the man in the soft hat waved them aside, stepped up
to the guardian of the peace and looking him straight in the
eyes, said:</p>
<p>"Criminal Investigation Department! Inspector Juve!"</p>
<p>The gendarme, who was quite unprepared for this announcement,
stepped back a pace and raised his eyes towards the man
who addressed him: then suddenly raised his hand to his <i>képi</i>
and came to attention.</p>
<p>"Beg pardon, Inspector, I didn't recognise you! M. Juve! And
you have been in this division a long time too!" He turned angrily
to the foremost porter. "Step forward, please, and let's have
no nonsense!"</p>
<p>Juve, who had thus disclosed his identity as a detective,
smiled, seeing that the gendarme assumed that the South
Steamship Company's porter was a thief.</p>
<p>"That's all right," he said. "Leave the man alone. He's done no
harm."</p>
<p>"Then who am I to arrest?" the puzzled gendarme asked.</p>
<p>The concierge broke in to explain: she had been much impressed
by the style and title of the stranger.</p>
<p>"If the gentleman had told me where he came from I would
certainly never have allowed anyone to go for a gendarme."</p>
<p>Inspector Juve smiled.</p>
<p>"If I had told you who I was just now, madame, when you
were, quite naturally, so upset, you would not have believed me.
You would have continued to call out. Now, I am particularly
anxious to avoid any scandal or noise at the present moment. I
rely on your discretion." He turned to the two porters, who were
dumb with amazement and could make nothing of the affair. "As
for you, my good fellows, I must ask you to leave your other
work and go back at once to your office in the rue d'Hauteville
and tell your manager—what is his name?"</p>
<p>"M. Wooland," one of the men replied.</p>
<p>"Good: tell M. Wooland that I want to see him here at the ear<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_74">[74]</a></span>liest
possible moment; and tell him to bring with him all the papers
he has that refer to M. Gurn. And not a word to anyone
about all this, please, especially in this neighbourhood. Take my
message to your manager, and that's all."</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>The porters had left hurriedly for the rue d'Hauteville and a
quarter of an hour went by. The detective had requested the
concierge to ask the Madame Aurore to whom she had previously
appealed so loudly for help, to take her place temporarily
in the lodge. Juve kept Mme. Doulenques upstairs with him
partly to get information from her, and partly to prevent her
from gossiping downstairs.</p>
<p>While he was opening drawers and ransacking furniture, and
plunging his hand into presses and cupboards, Juve asked the
concierge to describe this tenant of hers, M. Gurn, in whom he
appeared to be so deeply interested.</p>
<p>"He is a rather fair man," the concierge told him, "medium
height, stout build, and clean shaven like an Englishman;
there is nothing particular about him: he is like lots of other
people."</p>
<p>This very vague description was hardly satisfactory. The detective
told the policeman to unscrew the lock on a locked
trunk, and gave him a small screw-driver which he had found in
the kitchen. Then he turned again to Mme. Doulenques who
was standing stiffly against the wall, severely silent.</p>
<p>"You told me that M. Gurn had a lady friend. When used he
to see her?"</p>
<p>"Pretty often, when he was in Paris; and always in the afternoon.
Sometimes they were together till six or seven o'clock,
and once or twice the lady did not come down before half-past
seven."</p>
<p>"Used they to leave the house together?"</p>
<p>"No, sir."</p>
<p>"Did the lady ever stay the night here?"</p>
<p>"Never, sir."</p>
<p>"Yes: evidently a married woman," murmured the detective
as if speaking to himself.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_75">[75]</a></span></p>
<p>Mme. Doulenques made a vague gesture to show her ignorance
on the point.</p>
<p>"I can't tell you anything about that, sir."</p>
<p>"Very well," said the detective; "kindly pass me that coat behind
you."</p>
<p>The concierge obediently took down a coat from a hook and
handed it to Juve who searched it quickly, looked it all over and
then found a label sewn on the inside of the collar: it bore the
one word <i>Pretoria</i>.</p>
<p>"Good!" said he, in an undertone; "I thought as much."</p>
<p>Then he looked at the buttons; these were stamped on the
under side with the name <i>Smith</i>.</p>
<p>The gendarme understood what the detective was about, and
he too examined the clothes in the first trunk which he had just
opened.</p>
<p>"There is nothing to show where these things came from, sir,"
he remarked. "The name of the maker is not on them."</p>
<p>"That's all right," said Juve. "Open the other trunk."</p>
<p>While the gendarme was busy forcing this second lock Juve
went for a moment into the kitchen and came back holding a
rather heavy copper mallet with an iron handle, which he had
found there. He was looking at this mallet with some curiosity,
balancing and weighing it in his hands, when a sudden exclamation
of fright from the gendarme drew his eyes to the trunk, the
lid of which had just been thrown back. Juve did not lose all his
professional impassivity, but even he leaped forward like a flash,
swept the gendarme to one side, and dropped on his knees beside
the open box. A horrid spectacle met his eyes. For the trunk
contained a corpse!</p>
<p>The moment Mme. Doulenques caught sight of the ghastly
thing, she fell back into a chair half fainting, and there she remained,
unable to move, with her body hunched forward, and
haggard eyes fixed upon the corpse, of which she caught occasional
glimpses as the movements of Juve and the gendarme
every now and then left the shocking thing within the trunk exposed
to her view.</p>
<p>Yet there was nothing especially gruesome or repellent about<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_76">[76]</a></span>
the corpse. It was the body of a man of about fifty years of age,
with a pronounced brick-red complexion, and a lofty brow, the
height of which was increased by premature baldness. Long, fair
moustaches drooped from the upper lip almost to the top of the
chest. The unfortunate creature was doubled up in the trunk,
with knees bent and head forced down by the weight of the lid.
The body was dressed with a certain fastidiousness, and it was
obviously that of a man of fashion and distinction; there was no
wound to be seen. The calm, quiet face suggested that the victim
had been taken by surprise while in the full vigour of life
and killed suddenly, and had not been subjected to the anguish
of a fight for life or to any slow agony.</p>
<p>Juve half turned to the concierge.</p>
<p>"When did you see M. Gurn last? Exactly, please: it is
important."</p>
<p>Mme. Doulenques babbled something unintelligible and
then, as the detective pressed her, made an effort to collect her
scattered wits.</p>
<p>"Three weeks ago at least, sir: yes, three weeks exactly; no one
has been here since, I will swear."</p>
<p>Juve made a sign to the gendarme, who understood, and felt
the body carefully.</p>
<p>"Quite stiff, and hard, sir," he said; "yet there is no smell from
it. Perhaps the cold——"</p>
<p>Juve shook his head.</p>
<p>"Even severe cold could not preserve a body in that condition
for three weeks, and it's not cold now, but there is this:" and he
showed his subordinate a small yellowish stain just at the opening
of the collar, close to the Adam's apple, which, in spite of the
comparative thinness of the body, was very much developed.</p>
<p>Juve took the corpse under the arm-pits and raised it gently,
wishing to examine it closely, but anxious, also, not to alter its
position. On the nape of the neck was a large stain of blood, like
a black wen and as big as a five-shilling piece, just above the last
vertebra of the spinal column.</p>
<p>"That's the explanation," the detective murmured, and carefully
replacing the body he continued his investigation. With<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_77">[77]</a></span>
quick, clever hands he searched the coat pockets and found the
watch in its proper place. Another pocket was full of money,
chiefly small change, with a few louis. But Juve looked in vain
for the pocket-book which the man had doubtless been in the
habit of carrying about with him: the pocket-book probably containing
some means of identification.</p>
<p>The inspector merely grunted, got up, began pacing the
room, and questioned the concierge.</p>
<p>"Did M. Gurn have a motor-car?"</p>
<p>"No, sir," she replied, looking surprised. "Why do you ask?"</p>
<p>"Oh, for no particular reason," said the inspector with affected
indifference, but at the same time he was contemplating
a large nickel pump that lay on a what-not, a syringe holding
perhaps half a pint, like those that chauffeurs use. He looked at
it steadfastly for several minutes. His next question was addressed
to the gendarme who was still on his knees by the
trunk.</p>
<p>"We have found one yellow stain on the neck; you will very
likely find some more. Have a look at the wrists and the calves
of the legs and the stomach. But do it carefully, so as not to disturb
the body." While the gendarme began to obey his chief's
order, carefully undoing the clothing on the corpse, Juve looked
at the concierge again.</p>
<p>"Who did the work of this flat?"</p>
<p>"I did, sir."</p>
<p>Juve pointed to the velvet curtain that screened the door between
the little anteroom and the room in which they were.</p>
<p>"How did you come to leave that curtain unhooked at the top,
without putting it to rights?"</p>
<p>Mme. Doulenques looked at it.</p>
<p>"It's the first time I've seen it like that," she said apologetically;
"the curtain could not have been unhooked when I did the
room last without my noticing it. Anyhow, it hasn't been like that
long. I ought to say that as M. Gurn was seldom here I didn't do
the place out thoroughly very often."</p>
<p>"When did you do it out last?"</p>
<p>"Quite a month ago."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_78">[78]</a></span></p>
<p>"That is to say M. Gurn went away a week after you last
cleaned the place up?"</p>
<p>"Yes, sir."</p>
<p>Juve changed the subject, and pointed to the corpse.</p>
<p>"Tell me, madame, did you know that person?"</p>
<p>The concierge fought down her nervousness and for the first
time looked at the unfortunate victim with a steady gaze.</p>
<p>"I have never seen him before," she said, with a little shudder.</p>
<p>"And so, when that gentleman came up here, you did not notice
him?" said the inspector gently.</p>
<p>"No, I did not notice him," she declared, and then went on as
if answering some question which occurred to her own mind.
"And I wonder I didn't, for people very seldom enquired for
M. Gurn; of course when the lady was with him M. Gurn was
not at home to anybody. This—this dead man must have come
straight up himself."</p>
<p>Juve nodded, and was about to continue his questioning when
the bell rang.</p>
<p>"Open the door," said Juve to the concierge, and he followed
her to the entrance of the flat, partly fearing to find some intruder
there, partly hoping to see some unexpected person
whose arrival might throw a little light upon the situation.</p>
<p>At the opened door Juve saw a young man of about twenty-five,
an obvious Englishman with clear eyes and close-cropped
hair. With an accent that further made his British origin unmistakable,
the visitor introduced himself:</p>
<p>"I am Mr. Wooland, manager of the Paris branch of the South
Steamship Company. It seems that I am wanted at M. Gurn's
flat on the fifth floor of this house, by desire of the police."</p>
<p>Juve came forward.</p>
<p>"I am much obliged to you for putting yourself to this inconvenience,
sir: allow me to introduce myself: M. Juve, an
Inspector from the Criminal Investigation Department. Please
come in."</p>
<p>Solemn and impassive, Mr. Wooland entered the room; a side
glance suddenly showed him the open trunk and the dead body,
but not a muscle of his face moved. Mr. Wooland came of a good<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_79">[79]</a></span>
stock, and had all that admirable self-possession which is the
strength of the powerful Anglo-Saxon race. He looked at the inspector
in somewhat haughty silence, waiting for him to begin.</p>
<p>"Will you kindly let me know, sir, the instructions your firm
had with regard to the forwarding of the baggage which you sent
for to this flat of M. Gurn's this morning?"</p>
<p>"Four days ago, Inspector," said the young man, "on the 14th
of December to be precise, the London mail brought us a letter
in which Lord Beltham, who had been a client of ours for several
years, instructed us to collect, on the 17th of December,
that is, to-day, four articles marked H. W. K., 1, 2, 3 and 4, from
M. Gurn's apartments, 147 rue Lévert. He informed us that the
concierge had orders to allow us to take them away."</p>
<p>"To what address were you to despatch them?"</p>
<p>"Our client instructed us to forward the trunks by the first
steamer to Johannesburg, where he would send for them; we
were to send two invoices with the goods as usual; the third invoice
was to be sent to London, Box 63, Charing Cross Post
Office."</p>
<p>Juve made a note of Box 63, Charing Cross in his pocket-book.</p>
<p>"Addressed to what name or initials?"</p>
<p>"Simply Beltham."</p>
<p>"Good. There are no other documents relating to the matter?"</p>
<p>"No, I have nothing else," said Mr. Wooland.</p>
<p>The young fellow relapsed into his usual impassive silence.
Juve watched him for a minute or two and then said:</p>
<p>"You must have heard the various rumours current in Paris
three weeks ago, sir, about Lord Beltham. He was a very well-known
personage in society. Suddenly he disappeared; his wife
left nothing undone to give the matter the widest publicity.
Were you not rather surprised when you received a letter from
Lord Beltham four days ago?"</p>
<p>Mr. Wooland was not disconcerted by the rather embarrassing
question.</p>
<p>"Of course I had heard of Lord Beltham's disappearance, but
it was not for me to form any official opinion about it. I am a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_80">[80]</a></span>
business man, sir, not a detective. Lord Beltham might have disappeared
voluntarily or the reverse: I was not asked to say
which. When I got his letter I simply decided to carry out the
orders it contained. I should do the same again in similar circumstances."</p>
<p>"Are you satisfied that the order was sent by Lord Beltham?"</p>
<p>"I have already told you, sir, that Lord Beltham had been a
client of ours for several years; we have had many similar dealings
with him. This last order which we received from him appeared
to be entirely above suspicion: identical in form and in
terms with the previous letters we had had from him." He took
a letter out of his pocket-book, and handed it to Juve. "Here is
the order, sir; if you think proper you can compare it with similar
documents filed in our office in the rue d'Hauteville"; and as
Juve was silent, Mr. Wooland, with the utmost dignity, enquired:
"Is there any further occasion for me to remain here?"</p>
<p>"Thank you, sir, no," Juve replied. Mr. Wooland made an almost
imperceptible bow and was on the point of withdrawing
when the detective stayed him once more. "M. Wooland, did
you know Lord Beltham?"</p>
<p>"No, sir: Lord Beltham always sent us his orders by letter;
once or twice he has spoken to us over the telephone, but he
never came to our office, and I have never been to his house."</p>
<p>"Thank you very much," said Juve, and with a bow Mr.
Wooland withdrew.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>With meticulous care Juve replaced every article which he
had moved during his investigations. He carefully shut the lid of
the trunk, thus hiding the unhappy corpse from the curious eyes
of the gendarme and the still terrified Mme. Doulenques. Then
he leisurely buttoned his overcoat and spoke to the gendarme.</p>
<p>"Stay here until I send a man to relieve you; I am going to
your superintendent now." At the door he called the concierge.
"Will you kindly go down before me, madame? Return to your
lodge, and please do not say a word about what has happened to
anyone whatever."</p>
<p>"You can trust me, sir," the worthy creature murmured, and<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_81">[81]</a></span>
Juve walked slowly away from the house with head bowed in
thought.</p>
<p>There could be no doubt about it: the body in the trunk was
that of Lord Beltham! Juve knew the Englishman quite well.
But who was the murderer?</p>
<p>"Everything points to Gurn," Juve thought, "and yet would an
ordinary murderer have dared to commit such a crime as this?
Am I letting my imagination run away with me again? I don't
know: but it seems to me that about this murder, committed in
the very middle of Paris, in a crowded house where yet nobody
heard or suspected anything, there is an audacity, a certainty of
impunity, and above all a multiplicity of precautions, that are
typical of the Fantômas manner!" He clenched his fists and an
evil smile curled his lips as he repeated, like a threat, the name
of that terrible and most mysterious criminal, of whose hellish
influence he seemed to be conscious yet once again. "Fantômas!
Fantômas! Did Fantômas really commit this murder? And if he
did, shall I ever succeed in throwing light upon this new mystery,
and learning the secret of that tragic room?"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_82">[82]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">VIII. A Dreadful Confession</span></h2>
<p>While Juve was devoting his marvellous skill and incomparable
daring to the elucidation of the new case with which
the Criminal Investigation Department had entrusted him in
Paris, things were marching at Beaulieu, where the whole machinery
of the law was being set in motion for the discovery and
arrest of Charles Rambert.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>With a mighty clatter and racket Bouzille came down the
slope and stopped before old mother Chiquard's cottage. He arrived
in his own equipage, and an extraordinary one it was!</p>
<p>Bouzille was mounted upon a tricycle of prehistoric design,
with two large wheels behind and a small steering wheel in
front, and a rusty handle-bar from which all the plating was
worn off. The solid rubber tyres which once had adorned the
machine had worn out long ago, and were now replaced by
twine twisted round the felloes of the wheels; this was for ever
fraying away and the wheels were fringed with a veritable lace-work
of string. Bouzille must have picked up this impossible
machine for an old song at some local market, unless perhaps
some charitable person gave it to him simply to get rid of it. He
styled this tricycle his "engine," and it was by no means the
whole of his equipage. Attached to the tricycle by a stout rope
was a kind of wicker perambulator on four wheels, which he
called his "sleeping-car," because he stored away in it all the bits
of rag he picked up on his journeys, and also his very primitive
bedding and the little piece of waterproof canvas under which
he often slept in the open air. Behind the sleeping-car was a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_83">[83]</a></span>
third vehicle, the restaurant-car, consisting of an old soap box
mounted on four solid wooden wheels, which were fastened to
the axles by huge conical bolts; in this he kept his provisions;
lumps of bread and fat, bottles and vegetables, all mixed up in
agreeable confusion. Bouzille made quite long journeys in this
train of his, and was well known throughout the south-west of
France. Often did the astonished population see him bent over
his tricycle, with his pack on his back, pedalling with extraordinary
rapidity down the hills, while the carriages behind him
bumped and jumped over the inequalities in the surface of the
road until it seemed impossible that they could retain their
equilibrium.</p>
<p>Old mother Chiquard had recognised the cause of the racket.
The healthy life of the country had kept the old woman strong
and active in spite of the eighty-three years that had passed over
her head, and now she came to her door, armed with a broom,
and hailed the tramp in angry, threatening tones.</p>
<p>"So it's you, is it, you thief, you robber of the poor! It's shocking,
the way you spend your time in evil doing! What do you
want now, pray?"</p>
<p>Slowly and sheepishly and with head bowed, Bouzille approached
mother Chiquard, nervously looking out for a whack
over the head with the broom the old lady held.</p>
<p>"Don't be cross," he pleaded when he could get in a word; "I
want to come to an arrangement with you, mother Chiquard, if
it can be done."</p>
<p>"That's all according," said the old woman, eyeing the tramp
with great mistrust; "I haven't much faith in arrangements with
you: rascals like you always manage to do honest folk."</p>
<p>Mother Chiquard turned back into her cottage; it was no
weather for her to stop out of doors, for a strong north wind was
blowing, and that was bad for her rheumatism. Bouzille deliberately
followed her inside and closed the door carefully behind
him. Without ceremony he walked up to the hearth, where a
scanty wood fire was burning, and put down his pack so as to be
able to rub his hands more freely.</p>
<p>"Miserable weather, mother Chiquard!"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_84">[84]</a></span></p>
<p>The obstinate old lady stuck to her one idea.</p>
<p>"If it isn't miserable to steal my rabbit, this is the finest
weather that ever I saw!"</p>
<p>"You make a lot of fuss about a trifle," the tramp protested,
"especially since you will be a lot the better by the arrangement
I'm going to suggest."</p>
<p>The notion calmed mother Chiquard a little, and she sat
down on a form, while Bouzille took a seat upon the table.</p>
<p>"What do you mean?" the old woman enquired.</p>
<p>"Well," said Bouzille, "I suppose your rabbit would have
fetched a couple of shillings in the market; I've brought you two
fowls that are worth quite eighteen-pence each, and if you will
give me some dinner at twelve o'clock I will put in a good morning's
work for you."</p>
<p>Mother Chiquard looked at the clock upon the wall; it was
eight o'clock. The tramp's proposal represented four hours'
work, which was not to be despised; but before striking the bargain
she insisted on seeing the fowls. These were extracted from
the pack; tied together by the feet, and half suffocated, the unfortunate
creatures were not much to look at, but they would be
cheap, which was worth considering.</p>
<p>"Where did you get these fowls?" mother Chiquard asked,
more as a matter of form than anything else, for she was pretty
sure they had not been honestly come by.</p>
<p>Bouzille put his finger to his lip.</p>
<p>"Hush!" he murmured gently; "that's a secret between me
and the poultry. Well, is it a go?" and he held out his hand to the
old lady.</p>
<p>She hesitated a moment and then made up her mind.</p>
<p>"It's a go," she said, putting her horny fingers into the man's
hard palm. "You shall chop me some wood first, and then go
down to the river for the rushes I have put in to soak; they must
be well swollen by this time."</p>
<p>Bouzille was glad to have made it up with mother Chiquard,
and pleased at the prospect of a good dinner at midday; he
opened the cottage door, and leisurely arranged a few logs
within range of the axe with which he was going to split them;<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_85">[85]</a></span>
mother Chiquard began to throw down some grain to the skinny
and famished fowls that fluttered round her.</p>
<p>"I thought you were in prison, Bouzille," she said, "over stealing
my rabbit, and also over that affair at the château of
Beaulieu."</p>
<p>"Oh, those are two quite different stories," Bouzille replied.
"You mustn't mix them up together on any account. As for the
château job, every tramp in the district has been run in: I was
copped by M'sieu Morand the morning after the murder; he
took me into the kitchen of the château and Mme. Louise gave
me something to eat. There was another chap there with me, a
man named François Paul who doesn't belong to these parts;
between you and me, I thought he was an evil-looking customer
who might easily have been the murderer, but it doesn't do to
say that sort of thing, and I'm glad I held my tongue because
they let him go. I heard no more about it, and five days later I
went back to Brives to attend the funeral of the Marquise de
Langrune. That was a ceremony if you like! The church all
lighted up, and all the nobility from the neighbourhood present.
I didn't lose my time, for I knew all the gentlemen and ladies
and took the best part of sixteen shillings, and the blind beggar
who sits on the steps of the church called me all the names he
could put his tongue to!"</p>
<p>The tramp's story interested mother Chiquard mightily, but
her former idea still dominated her mind.</p>
<p>"So they didn't punish you for stealing my rabbit?"</p>
<p>"Well, they did and they didn't," said Bouzille, scratching his
head. "M'sieu Morand, who is an old friend of mine, took me to
the lock-up at Saint-Jaury, and I was to have gone next morning
to the court at Brives, where I know the sentence for stealing
domestic animals is three weeks. That would have suited me all
right just now, for the prison at Brives is quite new and very
comfortable, but that same night Sergeant Doucet shoved another
man into the clink with, me at Saint-Jaury, a raving lunatic
who started smashing everything up, and tried to tear my eyes
out. Naturally, I gave him as good as I got, and the infernal row
we made brought in the sergeant. I told him the chap wanted to<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_86">[86]</a></span>
throttle me, and he was nonplussed, for he couldn't do anything
with the man, who was fairly mad, and couldn't leave me alone
there with him. So at last the sergeant took me to one side and
told me to hook it and not let him see me again. So there it is."</p>
<p>While he was chattering like this Bouzille had finished the job
set him by mother Chiquard, who meanwhile had peeled some
potatoes and poured the soup on the bread. He wiped his brow,
and seeing the brimming pot, gave a meaning wink and licked
his tongue.</p>
<p>"I'll make the fire up, mother Chiquard; I'm getting jolly
hungry."</p>
<p>"So you ought to be, at half-past eleven," the old woman
replied. "Yes, we'll have dinner, and you can get the rushes out
afterwards."</p>
<p>Mother Chiquard was the proud free-holder of a little cottage
that was separated from the bank of the Dordogne by the high
road between Martel and Montvalent. Round the cottage she
had a small orchard, and opposite, through a gap in the trees,
was a view of the yellow waters of the Dordogne and the chain
of hills that stood up on the far side of the river. Living here
summer and winter, with her rabbits and her fowls, mother
Chiquard earned a little money by making baskets; but she was
crippled with rheumatism, and was miserable every time she
had to go down to the river to pull out the bundles of rushes that
she put there to soak; the work meant not merely an hour's paddling
in mud up to the knees, but also a fortnight's acute agony
and at least a shilling for medicine. So whoever wanted to make
a friend of the old woman only had to volunteer to get the
rushes out for her.</p>
<p>As he ate, Bouzille told mother Chiquard of his plans for the
coming spring.</p>
<p>"Yes," he said, "since I'm not doing any time this winter I'm
going to undertake a long journey." He stopped munching for a
second and paused for greater effect. "I am going to Paris,
mother Chiquard!" Then, seeing that the old lady was utterly
dumbfounded by the announcement, he leant his elbows on the
table and looked at her over his empty plate. "I've always had<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_87">[87]</a></span>
one great desire—to see the Eiffel Tower: that idea has been
running in my head for the last fifteen years. Well, now I'm
going to gratify the wish. I hear you can get a room in Paris for
twopence-halfpenny a night, and I can manage that."</p>
<p>"How long will it take you to get there?" enquired the old
woman, immensely impressed by Bouzille's venturesome plan.</p>
<p>"That depends," said the tramp. "I must allow quite three
months with my train. Of course if I got run in on the way for
stealing, or as a rogue and vagabond, I couldn't say how long it
would take."</p>
<p>The meal was over, and the old woman was quietly washing
up her few plates and dishes, when Bouzille, who had gone
down to the river to fetch the rushes, suddenly called shrilly to
mother Chiquard.</p>
<p>"Mother Chiquard! Mother Chiquard! Come and look! Just
fancy, I've earned twenty-five francs!"</p>
<p>The summons was so urgent, and the news so amazing, that
the old lady left her house and hurried across the road to the
river bank. She saw the tramp up to his waist in the water, trying,
with a long stick, to drag out of the current a large object
which was not identifiable at a first glance. To all her enquiries
Bouzille answered with the same delighted cry, "I have earned
twenty-five francs," too intent on bringing his fishing job to a
successful issue even to turn round. A few minutes later he
emerged dripping from the water, towing a large bundle to the
safety of the bank. Mother Chiquard drew nearer, greatly interested,
and then recoiled with a shriek of horror.</p>
<p>Bouzille had fished out a corpse!</p>
<p>It was a ghastly sight: the body of a very young man, almost a
boy, with long, slender limbs; the face was so horribly swollen
and torn as to be shapeless. One leg was almost entirely torn
from the trunk. Through rents in the clothing strips of flesh
were trailing, blue and discoloured by their long immersion in
the water. On the shoulders and back of the neck were bruises
and stains of blood. Bouzille, who was quite unaffected by the
ghastliness of the object and still kept up his gay chant "I have
fished up a body, I've earned twenty-five francs," observed that<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_88">[88]</a></span>
there were large splinters of wood, rotten from long immersion,
sticking in some of the wounds. He stood up and addressed
mother Chiquard who, white as a sheet, was watching him in
silence.</p>
<p>"I see what it is: he must have got caught in some mill wheel:
that's what has cut him up like that."</p>
<p>Mother Chiquard shook her head uneasily.</p>
<p>"Suppose it was a murder! That would be an ugly business!"</p>
<p>"It's no good my looking at him any more," said Bouzille. "I
don't recognise him; he's not from the country."</p>
<p>"That's sure," the old woman agreed. "He's dressed like a gentleman."</p>
<p>The two looked at each other in silence. Bouzille was not
nearly so complacent as he had been a few minutes before. The
reward of twenty-five francs prompted him to go at once to inform
the police; the idea of a crime, suggested by the worthy
woman, disturbed him greatly, and all the more because he
thought it was well founded. Another murder in the neighbourhood
would certainly vex the authorities, and put the police in a
bad temper. Bouzille knew from experience that the first thing
people do after a tragedy is to arrest all the tramps, and that if
the police are at all crotchety they always contrive to get the
tramps sentenced for something else. He had had a momentary
inclination to establish his winter quarters in prison, but since
then he had formed the plan of going to Paris, and liberty appealed
to him more. He reached a sudden decision.</p>
<p>"I'll punt him back into the water!"</p>
<p>But mother Chiquard stayed him, just as he was putting his
idea into execution.</p>
<p>"You mustn't: suppose somebody has seen us already? It
would land us in no end of trouble!"</p>
<p>Half an hour later, convinced that it was his melancholy duty,
Bouzille left two-thirds of his train in mother Chiquard's custody,
got astride his prehistoric tricycle and slowly pedalled off
towards Saint-Jaury.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>New Year's Day is a melancholy and a tedious one for every<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_89">[89]</a></span>body
whose public or private relations do not make it an exceptionally
interesting one. There is the alteration in the date, for
one thing, which is provocative of thought, and there is the enforced
idleness for another, coming upon energetic folk like a
temporary paralysis and leaving them nothing but meditation
wherewith to employ themselves.</p>
<p>Juve, comfortably installed in his own private study, was realising
this just as evening was falling on this first of January. He
was a confirmed bachelor, and for several years had lived in a little
flat on the fifth floor of an old house in the rue Bonaparte.
He had not gone out to-day, but though he was resting he was
not idle. For a whole month past he had been wholly engrossed
in his attempt to solve the mystery surrounding the two cases on
which he was engaged, the Beltham case, and the Langrune
case, and his mind was leisurely revolving round them now as he
sat in his warm room before a blazing wood fire, and watched
the blue smoke curl up in rings towards the ceiling. The two
cases were very dissimilar, and yet his detective instinct persuaded
him that although they differed in details their conception
and execution emanated not only from one single brain but
also from one hand. He was convinced that he was dealing with
a mysterious and dangerous individual, and that while he himself
was out in the open he was fighting a concealed and invisible
adversary; he strove to give form and substance to the
adversary, and the name of Fantômas came into his mind.
Fantômas! What might Fantômas be doing now, and, if he had
a real existence, as the detective most firmly believed, how was
he spending New Year's Day?</p>
<p>A sharp ring at the bell startled him from his chair, and not
giving his man-servant time to answer it, he went himself to the
door and took from a messenger a telegram which he hastily
tore open and read:</p>
<p>"Have found in the Dordogne drowned body of young man,
face unrecognisable, from description possibly Charles Rambert.
Please consider situation and wire course you will take."</p>
<p>The telegram had been handed in at Brives and was signed by
M. de Presles.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_90">[90]</a></span></p>
<p>"Something fresh at last," the detective muttered. "Drowned
in the Dordogne, and face unrecognisable! I wonder if it really
is Charles Rambert?"</p>
<p>Since M. Etienne Rambert and his son had disappeared so
unaccountably, the detective naturally had formulated mentally
several hypotheses, but he had arrived at no conclusion which
really satisfied his judgment. But though their flight had not surprised
him greatly, he had been rather surprised that the police
had not been able to find any trace of them, for rightly or
wrongly Juve credited them with a good deal of cleverness and
power. So it was by no means unreasonable to accept the death
of the fugitives as explanation of the failure of the police to find
them. However, this was a fresh development of the case, and
he was about to draft a reply to M. de Presles when once more
the bell rang sharply.</p>
<p>This time Juve did not move, but listened while his man
spoke to the visitor. It was an absolute rule of Juve's never to
receive visitors at his flat. If anyone wanted to see him on business,
he was to be found almost every day in his office at head-quarters
about eleven in the morning; to a few people he was
willing to give appointments at a quiet and discreet little café in
the boulevard Saint-Michel; but he invited no one to his own
rooms except one or two of his own relations from the country,
and even they had to be provided with a password before they
could obtain admission. So now, to all the entreaties of the
caller, Juve's servant stolidly replied with the assurance that his
master would see no one; yet the visitor's insistence was so great
that at last the servant was prevailed upon to bring in his card,
albeit with some fear as to the consequences for himself. But to
his extreme relief and surprise, Juve, when he had read the
name engraved upon the card, said sharply:</p>
<p>"Bring him in here at once!"</p>
<p>And in another couple of seconds M. Etienne Rambert was in
the room!</p>
<p>The old gentleman who had fled so mysteriously a few days
before, taking with him the son over whom so dread a charge
was hanging, bowed deferentially to the detective, with the piti<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_91">[91]</a></span>ful
mien of one who is crushed beneath the burden of misfortune.
His features were drawn, his face bore the stamp of
deepest grief, and in his hand he held an evening paper, which
in his agitation he had crumpled almost into a ball.</p>
<p>"Tell me, sir, if it is true," he said in low trembling tones. "I
have just read that."</p>
<p>Juve pointed to a chair, took the paper mechanically, and
smoothing it out, read, below a large head-line, "Is this a sequel
to the Beaulieu Crime?" a story similar to that he had just gathered
from M. de Presles' telegram.</p>
<p>Juve contemplated M. Etienne Rambert in silence for a few
minutes, and then, without replying directly to his visitor's first
question, asked him a question in that quiet voice of his, the
wonderful indifferent tonelessness of which concealed the least
clue to his inmost thoughts.</p>
<p>"Why do you come to me, sir?"</p>
<p>"To find out, sir," the old man answered.</p>
<p>"To find out what?"</p>
<p>"If that poor drowned corpse is—my son's: is my poor
Charles!"</p>
<p>"It is rather you who can tell me, sir," said Juve, impassive as
ever.</p>
<p>There was a pause. Despite his emotion, M. Rambert seemed
to be thinking deeply. Suddenly he appeared to make an important
decision, and raising his eyes to the detective he spoke very
slowly:</p>
<p>"Have pity, sir, on a broken-hearted father. Listen to me: I
have a dreadful confession to make!"</p>
<p>Juve drew his chair close to M. Etienne Rambert.</p>
<p>"I am listening," he said gently, and M. Etienne Rambert
began his "dreadful confession."</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_92">[92]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">IX. All for Honour</span></h2>
<p>Society had mustered in force at the Cahors Law Courts,
where the Assizes were about to be held. Hooting motor-cars
and antiquated coaches drawn by pursy horses were arriving
every minute, bringing gentry from the great houses in the
neighbourhood, squireens and well-to-do country people, prosperous
farmers and jolly wine-growers, all of them determined
not to miss "the trial" that was causing such immense excitement
because the principal figure in it was well known as a
friend of one of the oldest families in those parts; and because
he was not merely a witness, nor even the victim, but actually
the defendant in the case, although he had been admitted to bail
in the interval by order of the court.</p>
<p>Compared with those of large towns, this court room at
Cahors was small, but it was filled by a considerable and most
select crowd. Quiet greetings and low-toned conversation were
freely exchanged, but there was an air of melancholy about
every person present, and it was obvious that they were drawn
there by no mere curiosity or desire for horrid details, but by legitimate
interest in the development of great drama.</p>
<p>One of the leading heroines in the case was pointed out with
particular sympathy.</p>
<p>"That's Thérèse Auvernois, over there in the first row! The
President of the Court gave her that seat; the officer who took
the card of admission over to Querelles told me so."</p>
<p>"That's where Mme. de Vibray lives, isn't it?"</p>
<p>"Yes: she is sitting next to Thérèse now: that pretty woman in
grey. Since Mme. de Langrune's death she has kept the child<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_93">[93]</a></span>
with her, thinking, very rightly, that it would be too painful for
her to be at Beaulieu. The family council have appointed
President Bonnet temporary guardian of Thérèse. He is that
tall, thin man over there, talking to the steward, Dollon."</p>
<p>The Baronne de Vibray turned affectionately to Thérèse, who
was looking dreadfully pale in her long mourning veil.</p>
<p>"Are you sure this won't tire you too much, dear? Shall we go
outside for a little while?"</p>
<p>"Oh, no, please do not worry about me," Thérèse replied.
"Indeed I shall be all right."</p>
<p>President Bonnet sat by the two ladies. He had been engaged
solemnly exchanging bows with everyone in the court room
whom he considered it flattering to himself to know; now he
took part in the conversation, and displayed his special knowledge
by explaining the constitution of the court and pointing out
where the clerk sat, and where the public prosecutor sat, and
where the jury sat, all at great length and much to the interest
of the people near him: with, however, one exception; a man
dressed entirely in black, with his head half buried in the huge
collar of a travelling ulster, and dark glasses over his eyes, appeared
to be vastly bored by the old magistrate's disquisition.
Juve—for it was he—knew too much about legal procedure to
require explanations from President Bonnet.</p>
<p>Suddenly a thrill ran through the room and conversation
stopped abruptly. M. Etienne Rambert had just walked down
the gangway in the court to the seat reserved for him, just in
front of the witness box and close to a kind of rostrum in which
Maître Dareuil, an old member of the Cahors Bar, immediately
took his place. M. Etienne Rambert was very pale, but it was obvious
that he was by no means overwhelmed by the fatality overhanging
him. He was, indeed, a fine figure as he took his seat
and mechanically passed his hand through his long white curls,
flinging them back and raising his head almost as if in defiance
of the inquisitive crowd that was gazing at him.</p>
<p>Almost immediately after he had taken his seat a door was
thrown open and the jury filed in, and then a black-gowned
usher came forward and shrilly called for silence.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_94">[94]</a></span></p>
<p>"Stand up, gentlemen! Hats off, please! Gentlemen, the
Court!"</p>
<p>With solemn, measured steps, and heads bent as if absorbed
in profoundest meditation, the judges slowly proceeded to their
seats. The president formally declared the court open, whereupon
the clerk rose immediately to read the indictment.</p>
<p>The Clerk of the Court at Cahors was a most excellent man,
but modesty was his distinguishing characteristic and his chief
desire appeared to be to shun responsibility, figure as little
prominently as possible, and even escape observation altogether.
Assizes were not often held at Cahors, and he had had
few occasions to read an indictment as tragic as this present one,
with the result that he lacked confidence now. He read in a
toneless, monotonous voice, so nervously and softly that nobody
in the body of the court could hear a word he said, and even the
jury were obliged to lean their elbows on the desk before them
and make an ear trumpet of their hands to find out what it was
all about.</p>
<p>Etienne Rambert, however, was only a few feet from the
clerk; he did not miss a word, and it was evident from his nervous
movements every now and then that some passages in the
indictment hit him very hard indeed, and even lessened his general
confidence.</p>
<p>When the clerk had finished Etienne Rambert sat still, with
his forehead resting in his hands, as if crushed by the weight of
the memories the indictment had evoked. Then the sharp, thin
voice of the President of the Court snapped the chain of his
thoughts.</p>
<p>"Stand up, sir!"</p>
<p>And pale as death Etienne Rambert rose and folded his arms
across his breast. In firm, yet somehow muffled tones, he answered
the preliminary formal questions. His name was Hervé
Paul Etienne Rambert; his age, fifty-nine; his occupation, a
merchant, owning and working rubber plantations in South
America. Then followed the formal enquiry whether he had
heard and understood the indictment which had just been read.</p>
<p>"I followed it all, sir," he replied, with a little gesture expres<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_95">[95]</a></span>sive
of his sense of the gravity of the facts detailed and the
weight of the evidence adduced, which won general sympathy
for him. "I followed it all, but I protest against some of the allegations,
and I protest with my whole energy against the suggestion
that I have failed in my duty as a man of honour and as a
father!"</p>
<p>The President of the Court checked him irritably.</p>
<p>"Excuse me, I do not intend to permit you to extend the
pleadings indefinitely. I shall examine you on the various points
of the indictment, and you may protest as much as you please."
The unfeeling rudeness provoked no comment from the defendant,
and the President proceeded. "Well, you have heard the
indictment. It charges you first with having aided and abetted
the escape of your son, whom an enquiry held in another place
had implicated in the murder of the Marquise de Langrune; and
it charges you secondly with having killed your son, whose body
has been recovered from the Dordogne, in order that you might
escape the penalty of public obloquy."</p>
<p>At this brutal statement of the case Etienne Rambert made a
proud gesture of indignation.</p>
<p>"Sir," he exclaimed, "there are different ways of putting
things. I do not deny the purport of the indictment, but I object
to the summary of it that you present. No one has ever dared to
contend that I killed my son in order to escape public obloquy,
as you have just insinuated. I am entirely indifferent to the
worlds opinion. What the indictment is intended to allege, the
only thing it can allege, is that I wrought justice upon a criminal
who ought to have filled me with horror but whom, nevertheless,
I ought not to have handed over to the public executioner."</p>
<p>This time it was the judge's turn to be astonished. He was so
accustomed to the cheap triumphs that judges look to win in
court that he had expected to make mincemeat of this poor, broken
old man whom the law had delivered to his tender mercy.
But he discovered that the old man had fine courage and replied
with spirit to his malevolent remarks.</p>
<p>"We will discuss your right to take the law into your own
hands presently," he said, "but that is not the question now:<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_96">[96]</a></span>
there are other points which it would be well for you to explain
to the jury. Why, in the first place, did you obstinately decline to
speak to the examining magistrate?"</p>
<p>"I had no answer to make to the examining magistrate,"
Etienne Rambert answered slowly, as if he were weighing his
words, "because in my opinion he had no questions to put to me!
I do not admit that I am charged with anything contrary to the
Code, or that any such charge can be formulated against me. The
indictment charges me with having killed my son because I believed
him to be guilty of the murder of Mme. de Langrune and
would not hand him over to the gallows. I have never confessed
to that murder, sir, and nothing will ever make me do so. And
that is why I would not reply to the examining magistrate, because
I would not admit that there was anything before the court
concerning myself: because, since the dreadful tragedy in my
private life was exposed to public opinion, I desired that I should
be judged by public opinion, which, sir, is not represented by you
who are a professional judge, but by the jury here who will
shortly say whether I am really a criminal wretch: by the jury,
many of whom are fathers themselves and, when they think of
their own sons, will wonder what appalling visions must have
passed through my mind when I was forced to believe that my
boy, my own son, had committed a cowardly murder! What sort
of tragedy will they think that must have been for a man like me,
with sixty years of honour and of honourable life behind him?"</p>
<p>The outburst ended on a sob, and the whole court was moved
with sympathy, women wiping their eyes, men coughing, and
even the jury striving hard to conceal the emotion that stirred
them.</p>
<p>The judge glared round the court, and after a pause addressed
the defendant again with sarcastic phrases.</p>
<p>"So that is why you stood mute during the enquiry, was it, sir?
Odd! very odd! I admire the interpretation you place upon your
duty as an honourable man. It is—quaint!"</p>
<p>Etienne Rambert interrupted the sneering speech.</p>
<p>"I am quite sure, sir, that there are plenty of people here who
will understand and endorse what I did."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_97">[97]</a></span></p>
<p>The declaration was so pointedly personal that the judge took
it up.</p>
<p>"And I am quite sure that people of principle will understand
me when I have shown them your conduct as it really was. You
have a predilection for heroics; it will not be without interest to
bring things to the point. Your attitude throughout this affair has
been this:—it is not for me to anticipate the issue of the enquiry
which will be held some day into the murder of Mme. de
Langrune, but I must recall the fact that the moment you believed
your son was the murderer, the moment you discovered
the blood-stained towel which furnished the circumstantial evidence
of his guilt, you—the man of honour, mind you,—never
thought of handing over the culprit to the police who were
actually in the precincts of the château, but only thought of securing
his escape, and helping him to get away! You even
accompanied him in his flight, and so became in a sense his accomplice.
I suppose you do not deny that?"</p>
<p>Etienne Rambert shook with emotion and answered in ringing
tones.</p>
<p>"If you are of opinion, sir, that that was an act of complicity on
my part, I will not only not deny it, I will proclaim it from the
housetops! I became the accomplice of a murderer by inducing
him to run away, did I? You forget, sir, that at the moment when
I first believed my son was the culprit—I was not his accomplice
then, I suppose?—there was a bond between him and me already
that I could not possibly break: he was my son! Sir, the
duty of a father—and I attach the very loftiest meaning to the
word 'duty'—can never entail his giving up his son!"</p>
<p>A fresh murmur of sympathy through the court annoyed the
judge, who shrugged his shoulders.</p>
<p>"Let us leave empty rhetoric alone," he said. "You have plenty
of fine phrases with which to defend your action; that, indeed,
is your concern, as the jury will doubtless appreciate; but I think
it will be more advantageous to clear up the facts a little—not
more advantageous to you, perhaps, but that is what I am here
to do. So will you please tell me whether your son confessed to
having murdered Mme. de Langrune, either during that night<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_98">[98]</a></span>
when you persuaded him to run away, or afterwards? Yes or no,
please."</p>
<p>"I can't answer, sir. My son was mad! I will not believe my son
was a criminal! There was absolutely no motive to prompt him
to the deed, and his mother is in an asylum! That is the whole
explanation of the crime! If he committed murder, it was in a fit
of temporary insanity! He is dead; I refuse to cover his memory
with the stain of infamy!"</p>
<p>"In other words, according to you Charles Rambert did confess,
but you don't want to say so."</p>
<p>"I do not say he did confess."</p>
<p>"You leave it to be inferred."</p>
<p>Etienne Rambert made no reply, and the judge passed on to
another point.</p>
<p>"What exactly did you do after you left the château?"</p>
<p>"What anyone does, I suppose, when he runs away. We wandered
miserably about, going through fields and woods, I accusing
him and he defending himself. We avoided the villages,
scarcely venturing even in the early morning to go and buy food,
and walked quickly, wishing to get as far away as possible. We
spent the most frightful time it is possible to conceive."</p>
<p>"How long was all this?"</p>
<p>"I was with my son for four days, sir."</p>
<p>"So it was on the fourth day that you killed him?"</p>
<p>"Have pity, sir! I did not kill my son. It was a murderer that I
had with me, a murderer for whom the police were hunting and
for whom the guillotine was waiting!"</p>
<p>"A murderer, if you prefer it so," said the judge, entirely
heedless of the unhappy man's protests. "But you had no right
to assume the functions of executioner. Come, you admit you
did kill him?"</p>
<p>"I do not admit it."</p>
<p>"Do you deny that you killed him?"</p>
<p>"I did what my duty told me to do!"</p>
<p>"Still the same story!" said the judge, angrily drumming his
fingers on the desk. "You refuse to answer. But even in your own
interests you must have the courage to adopt some definite the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_99">[99]</a></span>ory.
Well, would you have been glad if your son had taken his
own life?"</p>
<p>"May I entreat you to remember that my son is dead!"
Etienne Rambert said once more. "I can only remember the
one fact that he was my son. I can't say that I desired his death.
I don't even know now if he was guilty. Whatever horror I may
feel for a crime, I can only remember now that Charles was not
in his right mind, and that he was the son of my loins!"</p>
<p>Again a tremor of emotion passed through the court, and
again the judge made an angry gesture ordering silence.</p>
<p>"So you decline to answer any of the principal points of the
indictment? The jury will no doubt appreciate the reason. Well,
can you let us know any of the advice you gave your son? If you
did not desire him to take his own life, and if you had no intention
of killing him, what did you want?"</p>
<p>"Oblivion," said Etienne Rambert, more calmly this time. "It
was not for me to give my son up, and I could only desire for
him oblivion, and if that was impossible, then death. I implored
him to think of the life that was before him, and the future of
shame, and I urged him to disappear for ever."</p>
<p>"Ah, you admit you did recommend him to commit suicide?"</p>
<p>"I mean I wanted him to go abroad."</p>
<p>The president feigned to be occupied with his notes, purposely
giving time for the importance of the last admission he
had wrung from Etienne Rambert to sink into the minds of the
jury. Then, without raising his head, he asked abruptly:</p>
<p>"You were very surprised to hear of his death?"</p>
<p>"No," said Rambert dully.</p>
<p>"How did you part from each other?"</p>
<p>"The last night we slept out of doors, under a stack; we were
both worn out and heart-sick; I prayed God of His mercy to
have pity on us. It was by the bank of the Dordogne. Next morning
when I woke up I was alone. He—my son—had disappeared.
I know no more."</p>
<p>The judge quelled the emotion in the court by a threatening
glance, and sprang a question on the defendant which was like
a trap to catch him lying.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_100">[100]</a></span></p>
<p>"If at that time you knew no more, how was it that a few days
later you called on Inspector Juve and asked him at once what
was known about the dead body of your son? The body had only
been recovered within the previous hour or two, and had not
been absolutely identified; the newspapers, at any rate, only
suggested the identity, with the utmost reserve. But you, sir, had
no doubt on the subject! You knew that the corpse was that of
your son! Why? How?"</p>
<p>It was one of the strongest points that could be made in support
of the theory that Etienne Rambert had murdered his son,
and the defendant immediately saw the difficulty he would have
in giving an adequate answer without compromising himself.
He turned to the jury, as though he had more hope in them than
in the court.</p>
<p>"Gentlemen," he cried, "this is torture! I can bear no more! I
cannot answer any more. You know quite enough to form your
judgment of me! Form it now! Say if I failed in my duty as a man
of honour and a father! I, at least, can answer no more questions!"
and he sank back in his place like a beaten man, crushed
by the distress evoked by all these painful memories.</p>
<p>The judge nodded to the jury with the grim complacency of a
man who has run down his game.</p>
<p>"This refusal to answer my questions is in itself tantamount to
a confession," he said acidly. "Well, we will proceed to call the
witnesses. I should like to say that the most interesting witness
would undoubtedly be Bouzille, the tramp who recovered the
body of Charles Rambert; but unfortunately that individual has
no fixed abode and it has not been possible to serve him with a
subpœna."</p>
<p>A number of witnesses succeeded one another in the box,
without, however, throwing any fresh light upon the matter;
they were peasants who had met the two Ramberts when they
were flying from the château, village bakers who had sold them
bread, and lockkeepers who had seen, but been unable to recover,
the floating corpse. The people in the court began to
weary of the proceedings, the more so as it was confidently rumoured
that Etienne Rambert had proudly declined to call any<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_101">[101]</a></span>
witnesses on his behalf, and even to allow his counsel to make
any rhetorical appeal to the jury. It might be imprudent, but
there was something fine in his defiance.</p>
<p>There was, however, one more thrill of interest for the public.
The judge had explained that he deemed it unnecessary to
call the detective Juve, inasmuch as all the information he had
to give was already detailed in the long indictment, but as Mme.
de Langrune's granddaughter was present in court, he would exercise
his discretion and request her to answer one or two questions.
And, much taken aback by this unexpected publicity,
Thérèse Auvernois followed the usher to the witness-box.</p>
<p>"Mademoiselle Thérèse Auvernois, I need hardly ask if you
recognise M. Rambert: but do you identify him as the person
whose conversation with young Charles Rambert you overheard
on that fatal night at the château of Beaulieu?"</p>
<p>"Yes, sir, that is M. Etienne Rambert," she replied in low
tones, and with a long and tender look of pity at the defendant.</p>
<p>"Will you please tell us anything you know that has any bearing
upon the charge brought against the defendant, the charge
of having killed his son?"</p>
<p>Thérèse made a visible effort to restrain her distress.</p>
<p>"I can only say one thing, sir: that M. Rambert was talking to
his son in tones of such terrible distress that I knew his heart was
broken by the tragedy. I have heard so much from my dear
grandmother about M. Etienne Rambert that I can only remember
that she always declared him to be a man of the very highest
principle, and I can only tell him here how dreadfully sorry I am
for him, and that everybody pities him as much as I do."</p>
<p>The judge had expected that Thérèse would be a witness hostile
to the defendant, whereas anything she was going to say
would obviously be much to his advantage. He cut her short.</p>
<p>"That is enough, mademoiselle. Thank you," and while
Thérèse was going back to her seat, wiping away the tears that
would come to her eyes despite her bravest efforts to keep her
self-control in the presence of so many strangers, the judge announced
that there were no other witnesses to be heard, and
called upon the Public Prosecutor to address the court.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_102">[102]</a></span></p>
<p>That personage rose at once and made a harangue that was
eloquent enough, no doubt, but introduced no new features into
the case. He relied upon his law rather than his facts: rapidly recapitulated
the defendant's contradictions and pitifully weak arguments,
if arguments they could be called: claimed that the
facts had been proved despite the defendant's steady refusal to
answer questions: and insisted on the point that the defendant
had no right whatever to take the law into his own hands, and either
kill his son or aid and abet in his flight. He concluded by
asking for a verdict of guilty, and a sentence of penal servitude
for life.</p>
<p>To him succeeded counsel for the defendant, whose speech
was brevity itself. He declined to make any appeal <i>ad misericordiam</i>,
but simply asked the jury to decide whether the defendant
had not acted as any high-principled father would act
when he discovered that his son had committed a crime during
a fit of insanity. He asked only for an impartial decision on the
facts, from men of high principle, and he sat down conscious of
having focussed the issue on the proper point and secured the
sympathy of the public.</p>
<p>The judges withdrew to their room, the jury retired to consider
their verdict, and Etienne Rambert was removed between
two warders. Juve had not stirred during the whole trial, or displayed
the least sign of approval or disapproval at any of the
questions and answers exchanged. He sat now unobtrusively listening
to the conversation that passed near him, relative to the
issue of the case.</p>
<p>President Bonnet opined that Etienne Rambert had blundered
in refusing to put up any defence: he had shown contempt
of court, which was always unwise, and the court would
show him no mercy. Dollon was of another opinion: according
to him Etienne Rambert was a sport of fate, deserving pity
rather than severity, and the court would be very lenient.
Another man declared that Etienne Rambert had been in an impasse:
however fondly he loved his son he could not but hope
that he might commit suicide: if a friend committed an offence
against the laws of honour, the only thing to do was to put a pis<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_103">[103]</a></span>tol
into his hand. And so on: the only point on which all were
unanimous was their sympathy with the defendant.</p>
<p>But a bell rang sharply; grave and impassive, the jury returned,
the judges filed once more into their seats, Etienne
Rambert was led back into court by the warders. In tense silence
the foreman of the jury spoke:</p>
<p>"In the presence of God and of man, and upon my honour
and my conscience I declare that the answer of the jury is 'no'
to all the questions put, and that is the answer of them all."</p>
<p>It was acquittal!</p>
<p>There was no applause, but yet it seemed as if the words that
set the defendant free had relieved every bosom of an overwhelming
dread; the air seemed easier to breathe; and there
was no one there but seemed physically better and also happier,
for hearing a verdict which gave sanction for the general pity
they had felt for the unhappy defendant, a man of honour and a
most unhappy father!</p>
<p>By their verdict the jury had implicitly applauded and commiserated
Etienne Rambert; but he still sat in the dock, broken
and prostrated by terrible distress, sobbing unreservedly and
making no effort to restrain his immeasurable grief.</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_104">[104]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">X. Princess Sonia's Bath</span></h2>
<p>Four months had passed since Etienne Rambert had been
acquitted at the Cahors Assizes, and the world was beginning
to forget the Beaulieu tragedy as it had already almost forgotten
the mysterious murder of Lord Beltham. Juve alone did
not allow his daily occupation to put the two cases out of his
mind. True, he had ceased to make any direct enquiries, and
gave no sign that he still had any interest in those crimes; but the
detective knew very well that in both of them he had to contend
with no ordinary murderer and he was content to remain in the
shadow, waiting and watching, in seeming inactivity, for some
slip which should betray the person or persons who had perpetrated
two of the most puzzling murders that he had ever had to
deal with.</p>
<p>It was the end of June, and Paris was beginning to empty. But
the spring had been late and cold that year, and although it was
within a couple of days of July society had lingered on in the
capital; luxuriously appointed carriages still swept along the
Champs Elysées when the audiences poured out of theatres and
concert rooms, and fashionably attired people still thronged the
broad pavements and gathered before the brilliantly lighted
cafés on the Rond-Point; even at that late hour the Champs
Elysées were as animated as in the busiest hours of the day.</p>
<p>At the Royal Palace Hotel the greatest animation prevailed.
The entire staff was hurrying about the vast entrance halls and
the palatial rooms on the ground floor; for it was the hour when
the guests of the Royal Palace Hotel were returning from their
evening's amusements, and the spacious vestibules of the im<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_105">[105]</a></span>mense
hotel were crowded with men in evening dress, young
fellows in dinner jackets, and women in low-cut gowns.</p>
<p>A young and fashionable woman got out of a perfectly appointed
victoria, and M. Louis, the manager of the staff, came
forward and bowed low, as he only did to clients of the very
highest distinction. The lady responded with a gracious smile,
and the manager called a servant.</p>
<p>"The lift for Mme. la Princesse Sonia Danidoff," and the next
moment the beautiful vision, who had created quite a sensation
merely in passing through the hall, had disappeared within the
lift and was borne up to her apartments.</p>
<p>Princess Sonia was one of the most important clients that the
Royal Palace Hotel possessed. She belonged to one of the greatest
families in the world, being, by her marriage with Prince
Danidoff, cousin to the Emperor of Russia and, so, connected
with many royal personages. Still barely thirty years of age, she
was not pretty but remarkably lovely, with wonderful blue eyes
which formed a strange and most bewitching contrast to the
heavy masses of black hair that framed her face. A woman of immense
wealth, and typically a woman of the world, the Princess
spent six months of the year in Paris, where she was a well-known
and much-liked figure in the most exclusive circles; she
was clever and cultivated, a first-rate musician, and her reputation
was spotless, although it was very seldom that she was accompanied
by her husband, whose duties as Grand
Chamberlain to the Tsar kept him almost continuously in
Russia. When in Paris she occupied a suite of four rooms on the
third floor of the Royal Palace Hotel, a suite identical in plan
and in luxury with that reserved for sovereigns who came there
incognito.</p>
<p>The Princess passed through her drawing-room, a vast, round
room, with a superb view over the Arc de Triomphe, and went
into her bedroom where she switched on the electric light.</p>
<p>"Nadine," she called, in her grave, melodious voice, and a
young girl, almost a child, sprang from a low divan hidden in a
corner. "Nadine, take off my cloak and unfasten my hair. Then
you can leave me: it is late, and I am tired."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_106">[106]</a></span></p>
<p>The little maid obeyed, helped her mistress to put on a silken
dressing gown, and loosened the masses of her hair. The
Princess passed a hand across her brow, as if to brush away a
headache.</p>
<p>"Before you go, get a bath ready for me; I think that would
rest me."</p>
<p>Ten minutes later Nadine crept back like a shadow, and found
the Princess standing dreamily on the balcony, inhaling deep
breaths of the pure night air. The child kissed the tips of her
mistress's fingers. "Your bath is quite ready," she said, and then
withdrew.</p>
<p>A few more minutes passed, and Princess Sonia, half undressed,
was just going into her dressing-room when suddenly
she turned and went back to the middle of the bedroom which
she had been on the point of leaving.</p>
<p>"Nadine," she called, "are you still there?" No answer came.
"I must have been dreaming," the Princess murmured, "but I
thought I heard someone moving about."</p>
<p>Sonia Danidoff was not unduly nervous, but like most people
who live much alone and in large hotels, she was wont to be
careful, and wished to make sure that no suspicious person had
made his way into her rooms. She made a rapid survey of her
bedroom, glanced into the brilliantly lighted drawing-room, and
then moved to her bed and saw that the electric bell board,
which enabled her to summon any of her own or of the hotel's
servants, was in perfect order. Then, satisfied, she went into her
dressing-room, quickly slipped off the rest of her clothes, and
plunged into the perfumed water in her bath.</p>
<p>She thrilled with pleasure as her limbs, so tired after a long
evening, relaxed in the warm water. On a table close to the bath
she had placed a volume of old Muscovite folk tales, and she was
glancing through these by the shaded light from a lamp above
her, when a fresh sound made her start. She sat up quickly in the
water and looked around her. There was nothing there. Then a
little shiver shook her and she sank down again in the warm bath
with a laugh at her own nervousness. And she was just beginning
to read once more, when suddenly a strange voice, with a ring<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_107">[107]</a></span>
of malice in it, sounded in her ear. Someone was looking over
her shoulder, and reading aloud the words she had just begun!</p>
<p>Before Sonia Danidoff had time to utter a cry or make a
movement, a strong hand was over her lips, and another gripped
her wrist, preventing her from reaching the button of the electric
bell that was fixed among the taps. The Princess was almost
fainting. She was expecting some horrible shock, expecting to
feel some horrible weapon that would take her life, when the
pressure on her lips and the grip upon her wrist gradually relaxed;
and at the same moment, the mysterious individual who
had thus taken her by surprise, moved round the bath and stood
in front of her.</p>
<p>He was a man of about forty years of age, and extremely well
dressed. A perfectly cut dinner jacket proved that the strange
visitor was no unclean dweller in the Paris slums: no apache
such as the Princess had read terrifying descriptions of in luridly
illustrated newspapers. The hands which had held her motionless,
and which now restored her liberty of movement to her,
were white and well manicured and adorned with a few plain
rings. The man's face was a distinguished one, and he wore a
very fine black beard; slight baldness added to the height of a
forehead naturally large. But what struck the Princess most, although
she had little heart to observe the man very closely, was
the abnormal size of his head and the number of wrinkles that
ran right across his temples, following the line of the eyebrows.</p>
<p>In silence and with trembling lips Sonia Danidoff made an instinctive
effort again to reach the electric bell, but with a quick
movement the man caught her shoulder and prevented her
from doing so. There was a cryptic smile upon the stranger's
lips, and with a furious blush Sonia Danidoff dived back again
into the milky water in the bath.</p>
<p>The man still stood in perfect silence, and at length the
Princess mastered her emotion and spoke to him.</p>
<p>"Who are you? What do you want? Go at once or I will call for
help."</p>
<p>"Above all things, do not call out, or you are a dead woman!"
said the stranger harshly. Then he gave a little ironical shrug of<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_108">[108]</a></span>
his shoulders. "As for ringing—that would not be easy: you
would have to leave the water to do so! And, besides, I object."</p>
<p>"If it is money, or rings you want," said the Princess between
clenched teeth, "take them! But go!"</p>
<p>The Princess had laid several rings and bracelets on the table
by her side, and the man glanced at them now, but without paying
much attention to what the Princess said.</p>
<p>"Those trinkets are not bad," he said, "but your signet ring is
much finer," and he calmly took the Princess's hand in his and
examined the ring that she had kept on her third finger. "Don't
be frightened," he added as he felt her hand trembling. "Let us
have a chat, if you don't mind! There is nothing especially
tempting about jewels apart from their personality," he said
after a little pause, "apart, I mean, from the person who habitually
wears them. But the bracelet on a wrist, or the necklace
round a neck, or the ring upon a finger is another matter!"</p>
<p>Princess Sonia was as pale as death and utterly at a loss to understand
what this extraordinary visitor was driving at. She held
up her ring finger, and made a frightened little apology.</p>
<p>"I cannot take this ring off: it fits too tight."</p>
<p>The man laughed grimly.</p>
<p>"That does not matter in the least, Princess. Anyone who
wanted to get a ring like that could do it quite simply." He felt
negligently in his waistcoat pocket and produced a miniature
razor, which he opened. He flashed the blade before the terrified
eyes of the Princess. "With a sharp blade like this a skilful
man could cut off the finger that had such a splendid jewel on
it, in a couple of seconds," and then, seeing that the Princess, in
fresh panic, was on the very point of screaming, quick as a flash
he laid the palm of his hand over her lips, while still speaking in
gentle tones to her. "Please do not be so terrified; I suppose you
take me for some common hotel thief, or highway robber, but,
Princess, can you really believe that I am anything of the kind?"</p>
<p>The man's tone was so earnest, and there was so deferent a
look in his eyes, that the Princess recovered some of her
courage.</p>
<p>"But I do not know who you are," she said half questioningly.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_109">[109]</a></span></p>
<p>"So much the better," the man replied; "there is still time to
make one another's acquaintance. I know who you are, and that
is the main thing. You do not know me, Princess? Well, I assure
you that on very many an occasion I have mingled with the
blessed company of your adorers!"</p>
<p>The Princess's anger rose steadily with her courage.</p>
<p>"Sir," she said, "I do not know if you are joking, or if you are
talking seriously, but your behaviour is extraordinary, hateful,
abominable——"</p>
<p>"It is merely original, Princess, and it pleases me to reflect
that if I had been content to be presented to you in the ordinary
way, in one or other of the many drawing-rooms we both frequent,
you would certainly have taken much less notice of me
than you have taken to-night; from the persistence of your gaze
I can see that from this day onwards, not a single feature of my
face will be unfamiliar to you, and I am convinced that, whatever
happens, you will remember it for a very long time."</p>
<p>Princess Sonia tried to force a smile. She had recovered her
self-possession, and was wondering what kind of man she had to
deal with. If she was still not quite persuaded that this was not a
vulgar thief, and if she had but little faith in his professions of
admiration of herself, she was considerably exercised by the
idea that she was alone with a lunatic. The man seemed to read
her thoughts for he, too, smiled a little.</p>
<p>"I am glad to see, Princess, that you have a little more confidence
now: we shall be able to arrange things ever so much better.
You are certainly much more calm, much less uneasy now.
Oh, yes, you are!" he added, checking her protest. "Why, it is
quite five minutes since you last tried to ring for help. We are
getting on. Besides, I somehow can't picture the Princess Sonia
Danidoff, wife of the Grand Chamberlain and cousin of His
Majesty the Emperor of All the Russias, allowing herself to be
surprised alone with a man whom she did not know. If she were
to ring, and someone came, how would the Princess account for
the gentleman to whom she had accorded an audience in the
most delightful, but certainly the most private of all her apartments?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_110">[110]</a></span></p>
<p>"But tell me," pleaded the unhappy woman, "how did you get
in here?"</p>
<p>"That is not the question," the stranger replied. "The problem
actually before us is, how am I to get out? For, of course,
Princess, I shall not be so indelicate as to prolong my visit unduly,
too happy only if you will permit me to repeat it on some
other evening soon." He turned his head, and plunging his hand
into the bath in the most natural manner possible, took out the
thermometer which was floating on the perfumed water. "Thirty
degrees, centigrade, Princess! Your bath is getting cold: you
must get out!"</p>
<p>In her blank astonishment Princess Sonia did not know
whether to laugh or cry. Was she alone with a monster who, after
having played with her as a cat plays with a mouse, would suddenly
turn and kill her? Or was this merely some irresponsible
lunatic, whom chance alone had enabled to get into her rooms?
Whatever the fact might be, the man's last words had made her
aware that her bath really was getting cold. A shiver shook her
whole frame, and yet——</p>
<p>"Oh, go, please go!" she implored him.</p>
<p>He shook his head, an ironical smile in his eyes.</p>
<p>"For pity's sake," she entreated him again, "have mercy on a
woman—a good woman!"</p>
<p>The man appeared to be considering.</p>
<p>"It is very embarrassing," he murmured, "and yet we must decide
upon something soon, for I am most anxious you should not
take a chill. Oh, it is very simple, Princess: of course you know
the arrangement of everything here so well that you could find
your dressing-gown at once, by merely feeling your way? We
will put out the light, and then you will be able to get out of the
bath in the dark without the least fear." He was on the very point
of turning off the switch of the lamp, when he stopped abruptly
and came back to the bath. "I was forgetting that exasperating
bell," he said. "A movement is so very easily made: suppose you
were to ring, by mere inadvertence, and regret it afterwards?"
Putting his idea into action, the man made a quick cut with his
razor and severed the two electric wires several feet above the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_111">[111]</a></span>
ground. "That is excellent," he said. "By the way, I don't know
where these other two wires go that run along the wall, but it is
best to be on the safe side. Suppose there were another bell?"
He lifted his razor once more and was trying to sever the electric
wires when the steel blade cut the insulator and an alarming
flash of light resulted. The man leaped into the air, and dropped
his razor. "Good Lord!" he growled, "I suppose that will make
you happy, madame: I have burnt my hand most horribly! These
must be wires for the light! But no matter: I have still got one
sound hand, and that will be enough for me to secure the darkness
that you want. And anyhow, you can press the button of
your bell as much as you like: it won't ring. So I am sure of a few
more minutes in your company."</p>
<p>Sudden darkness fell upon the room. Sonia Danidoff hesitated
for a moment and then half rose in the bath. All her pride
as a great lady was in revolt. If she must defend her honour and
her life, she was ready to do so, and despair would give her
strength; but in any event she would be better out of the water,
and on her feet, prepared. The darkness was complete, both in
the bathroom and in the adjacent bedroom, and the silence was
absolute. Standing up in the bath, Sonia Danidoff swept her
arms round in a circle to feel for any obstacle. Her touch met
nothing. She drew out one foot, and then the other, sprang towards
the chair on which she had left her dressing-gown,
slipped into it with feverish haste, slid her feet into her slippers,
stood motionless for just a second and then, with sudden decision,
moved to the switch by the door and turned on the light.</p>
<p>The man had gone from the bathroom, but taking two steps
towards her bedroom Sonia Danidoff saw him smiling at her
from the far end of that room.</p>
<p>"Sir," she said, "this—pleasantry—has lasted long enough.
You must go. You shall, you shall!"</p>
<p>"Shall?" the stranger echoed. "That is a word that is not often
used to me. But you are forgiven for not knowing that, Princess.
I forgot for the moment that I have not been presented to you.
But what is in your mind now?"</p>
<p>Between them was a little escritoire, on the top of which was<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_112">[112]</a></span>
lying the tiny inlaid revolver that Sonia Danidoff always carried
when she went out at night. Could she but get that into her
hands it would be a potent argument to induce this stranger to
obey her. The Princess also knew that in the drawer of that escritoire
which she could actually see half open, she had placed,
only a few minutes before going in to her bath, a pocket-book
filled with bank-notes for a hundred and twenty thousand
francs, money she had withdrawn from the strong-room of the
hotel that very morning in order to meet some bills next day.
She looked at the drawer and wondered if the pocket-book was
still there, or if this mysterious admirer of hers was only a vulgar
hotel thief after all. The man had followed her eyes to the
revolver.</p>
<p>"That is an unusual knick-knack to find in a lady's room,
Princess," and he sprang in front of her as she was taking a step
towards the escritoire, and took possession of the revolver. "Do
not be alarmed," he added, noticing her little gesture of terror.
"I would not do you an injury for anything in the world. I shall
be delighted to give this back to you in a minute, but first let me
render it harmless." He deftly slipped the six cartridges out of
the barrel and then handed the now useless weapon to the
Princess with a gallant little bow. "Do not laugh at my excess of
caution: but accidents happen so easily!"</p>
<p>It was in vain that the Princess tried to get near her escritoire
to ascertain if the drawer had been tampered with: the man kept
between her and it all the time, still smiling, still polite, but
watching every movement that she made. Suddenly he took his
watch from his pocket.</p>
<p>"Two o'clock! Already! Princess, you will be vexed with me for
having abused your hospitality to such an extent. I must go!" He
appeared not to notice the sigh of relief that broke from her, but
went on in a melodramatic tone. "I shall take my departure, not
through the window like a lover, nor up the chimney like a thief,
nor yet through a secret door behind the arras like a brigand of
romance, but like a gentleman who has come to pay his tribute
of homage and respect to the most enchanting woman in the
world—through the door!" He made a movement as if to go,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_113">[113]</a></span>
and came back. "And what do you think of doing now, Princess?
Perhaps you will be angry with me? Possibly some unpleasant
discovery, made after my departure, will raise some animosity in
your breast against me? You might even ring, directly my back
is turned, and alarm the staff, merely to embarrass me in my
exit, and without paying any attention to the subsequent possible
scandal. That is a complicated arrangement of bells and telephones
beside your bed! It would be a pity to spoil such a pretty
thing, and besides, I hate doing unnecessary damage!" The
Princess's eyes turned once more to the drawer: it was practically
certain that her money was not there now! But the man
broke in again upon her thoughts. "What can I be thinking of?
Just fancy my not having presented myself to you even yet! But
as a matter of fact I do not want to tell you my name out loud:
it is a romantic one, utterly out of keeping with the typically
modern environment in which we are now. Ah, if we were only
on the steep side of some mountain with the moon like a great
lamp above us, or by the shore of some wild ocean, there would
be some fascination in the proclamation of my identity in the silence
of the night, or in the midst of lightning and thunder as
the hurricane swept the seas! But here—in a third-floor suite of
the Royal Palace Hotel, surrounded by telephones and electric
light, and standing by a window overlooking the Champs
Elysées—it would be a positive anachronism!" He took a card
out of his pocket and drew near the little escritoire. "Allow me,
Princess, to slip my card into this drawer, left open on purpose,
it would seem," and while the Princess uttered an exclamation
she could not repress, he suited the action to the word. "And
now, Princess," he went on, compelling her to retreat before
him right to the door of the anteroom opening on to the corridor,
"you are too well bred, I am sure, not to wish to conduct
your visitor to the door of your suite." His tone altered abruptly,
and in a deep imperious voice that made the Princess quake he
ordered her: "And now, not a word, not a cry, not a movement
until I am outside, or I will kill you!"</p>
<p>Clenching her fists, and summoning all her strength to prevent
herself from swooning, Sonia Danidoff led the man to the ante<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_114">[114]</a></span>room
door. Slowly she unlocked the door and held it open, and
the man stepped quietly through. The next second he was gone!</p>
<p>Leaping back into her bedroom Sonia Danidoff set every bell
a-ringing; with great presence of mind she telephoned down to
the hall porter: "Don't let anybody go out! I have been robbed!"
and she pressed hard upon the special button that set the great
alarm bell clanging. Footsteps and voices resounded in the corridor:
the Princess knew that help was coming and ran to open
her door. The night watchman, and the manager of the third
floor came running up and waiters appeared in numbers at the
end of the corridor.</p>
<p>"Stop him! Stop him!" the Princess shouted. "He has only just
gone out: a man in a dinner jacket, with a great black beard!"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>A lad came hurrying out of the lift.</p>
<p>"Where are you going? What is the matter?" enquired the
hall porter, whose lodge was at the far end of the hall, next to the
courtyard of the hotel, the door into which he had just closed.</p>
<p>"I don't know," he answered. "There is a thief in the hotel!
They are calling from the other side."</p>
<p>"It's not in your set, then? By the way, what floor are you on?"</p>
<p>"The second."</p>
<p>"All right," said the hall porter, "it's the third floor that they
are calling from. Go up and see what is wrong."</p>
<p>The lad turned on his heel, and disregarding the notice forbidding
servants to use the passenger lift, hurried back into it
and upstairs again. He was a stoutly built fellow, with a smooth
face and red hair. On the third floor he stopped, immediately
opposite Sonia Danidoff's suite. The Princess was standing at
her door, taking no notice of the watchman Muller's efforts to
soothe her excitement, and mechanically twisting between her
fingers the blank visiting card which her strange visitor had left
in place of her pocket-book and the hundred and twenty thousand
francs. There was no name whatever on the card.</p>
<p>"Well," said Muller, to the red-headed lad, "where do you
come from?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_115">[115]</a></span></p>
<p>"I'm the new man on the second floor," the fellow answered.
"The hall porter sent me up to find out what was the matter."</p>
<p>"Matter!" said Muller. "Somebody has robbed the Princess.
Here, send someone for the police at once."</p>
<p>"I'll run, sir," and as the lift, instead of being sent down, had
carelessly been sent up to the top floor, the young fellow ran
down the staircase at full speed.</p>
<p>Through the telephone, Muller was just ordering the hall
porter to send for the police, when the second-floor servant
rushed up and caught him by the arm, dragging him away from
the instrument.</p>
<p>"Open the door for the Lord's sake! I'm off to the police station,"
and the hall porter made haste to facilitate his departure.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>On the top floor cries of astonishment re-echoed. The servants
had been alarmed by the uproar and, surprised to see the
lift stop and nobody get out of it, they opened the door and
found a heap of clothing, a false beard, and a wig. Two housemaids
and a valet gazed in amazement at these extraordinary
properties, and never thought of informing the manager, M.
Louis. Meantime, however, that gentleman had hurried through
the mazes of the hotel, and had just reached the third floor
when he was stopped by the Baronne Van den Rosen, one of the
hotel's oldest patronesses.</p>
<p>"M. Louis!" she exclaimed, bursting into sobs. "I have just
been robbed of my diamond necklace. I left it in a jewel-case on
my table before going down to dinner. When I heard the noise
just now, I got up and looked through my jewel-case, and the
necklace is not there."</p>
<p>M. Louis was too dazed to reply. Muller ran up to him.</p>
<p>"Princess Sonia Danidoff's pocket-book has been stolen," he
announced; "but I have had the hotel doors shut and we shall be
sure to catch the thief."</p>
<p>The Princess came near to explain matters, but at that moment
the servants came down from upstairs, bringing with them
the make-up articles which they had found in the lift. They laid<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_116">[116]</a></span>
these on the ground without a word and M. Louis was staring at
them when Muller had a sudden inspiration.</p>
<p>"M. Louis, what is the new man on the second floor like?"</p>
<p>Just at that instant a servant appeared at the end of the corridor,
a middle-aged man with white whiskers and a bald head.</p>
<p>"There he is, coming towards us," M. Louis replied. "His
name is Arnold."</p>
<p>"Good God!" cried Muller; "and the red-headed fellow: the
carroty chap?" M. Louis shook his head, not understanding, and
Muller tore himself away and rushed down to the hall porter.
"Has he gone out? Has anyone gone out?"</p>
<p>"No one," said the porter, "except, of course, the servant from
the second floor, whom you sent for the police."</p>
<p>"The carroty chap?" Muller enquired.</p>
<p>"Yes, the carroty chap."</p>
<p>Princess Sonia Danidoff lay back in an easy chair, receiving
the anxious attentions of Nadine, her Circassian maid. M. Louis
was holding salts to her nostrils. The Princess still held in her
hands the card left by the mysterious stranger who had just
robbed her so cleverly of a hundred and twenty thousand francs.
As she slowly came to herself the Princess gazed at the card as
if fascinated, and this time her haggard eyes grew wide with astonishment.
For upon the card, which hitherto had appeared
immaculately white, marks and letters were gradually becoming
visible, and the Princess read:</p>
<p>"Fan—tô—mas!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_117">[117]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XI. Magistrate and Detective</span></h2>
<p>M. Fuselier was standing in his office in the law courts at
Paris, meditatively smoothing the nap of his silk hat. His
mind was busy with the enquiries he had been prosecuting during
the day, and although he had no reason to be dissatisfied
with his day's work he had no clear idea as to what his next steps
ought to be.</p>
<p>Three discreet taps on the door broke in upon his thoughts.</p>
<p>"Come in," he said, and then stepped forward with a hearty
welcome as he recognised his visitor. "Juve, by all that is wonderful!
What good wind has blown you here? I haven't seen you
for ages. Busy?"</p>
<p>"Frightfully."</p>
<p>"Well, it's a fact that there's no dearth of sensational crime just
now. The calendar is terribly heavy."</p>
<p>Juve had ensconced himself in a huge easy chair in a corner
of the room.</p>
<p>"Yes," he said, "you are quite right. But unfortunately the calendar
won't be a brilliant one for the police. There may be lots
of cases, but there are not lots that they have worked out to a
finish."</p>
<p>"You've got nothing to grumble at," M. Fuselier smiled. "You
have been in enough cases lately that were worked out to a finish.
Your reputation isn't in any danger of diminishing."</p>
<p>"I don't know what you mean," Juve said deprecatingly. "If
you refer to the Beltham and Langrune cases, you must admit
that your congratulations are not deserved. I have achieved no
definite result in either of those affairs."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_118">[118]</a></span></p>
<p>M. Fuselier also dropped into a comfortable chair. He lighted
a cigarette.</p>
<p>"You have found out nothing fresh about that mysterious
murder of Lord Beltham?"</p>
<p>"Nothing. I'm done. It is an insoluble mystery to me."</p>
<p>"You seem to be very sorry for yourself, but really you
needn't be, Juve. You cleared up the Beltham case, and you
solved the Langrune case, although you try to make out you didn't.
And allow me to inform you, those two successes count, my
friend."</p>
<p>"You are very kind, but you are rather misinformed.
Unfortunately I have not cleared up the Beltham case at all."</p>
<p>"You found the missing peer."</p>
<p>"Well, yes, but——"</p>
<p>"That was an amazing achievement. By the way, Juve, what
led you to go to the rue Lévert to search Gurn's trunks?"</p>
<p>"That was very simple. You remember what an excitement
there was when Lord Beltham disappeared? Well, when I was
called in I saw at once that all ideas of accident or suicide might
be dismissed, and that consequently the disappearance was due
to crime. Once convinced of that, I very naturally suspected every
single person who had ever had relations with Lord Beltham, for
there was no single individual for me to suspect. Then I found out
that the ex-Ambassador had been in continuous association with
an Englishman named Gurn whom he had known in the South
African war, and who led a very queer sort of life. That of course
took me to Gurn's place, if for nothing else than to pick up information.
And—well, that's all about it. It was just by going to
Gurn's place to pump him, rather than anything else, that I found
the noble lord's remains locked away in the trunk."</p>
<p>"Your modesty is delightful, Juve," said M. Fuselier with an
approving nod. "You present things as if they were all matters of
course, whereas really you are proving your extraordinary instinct.
If you had arrived only twenty-four hours later the corpse
would have been packed off to the Transvaal, and only the Lord
knows if after that the extraordinary mystery ever would have
been cleared up."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_119">[119]</a></span></p>
<p>"Luck," Juve protested: "pure luck!"</p>
<p>"And were your other remarkable discoveries luck too?" enquired
M. Fuselier with a smile. "There was your discovery that
sulphate of zinc had been injected into the body to prevent it
from smelling offensively."</p>
<p>"That was only a matter of using my eyes," Juve protested.</p>
<p>"All right," said the magistrate, "we will admit that you did not
display any remarkable acumen in the Beltham case, if you
would rather have it so. That does not alter the fact that you
have solved the Langrune case."</p>
<p>"Solved it!"</p>
<p>M. Fuselier flicked the ash off his cigarette, and leant forward
towards the detective.</p>
<p>"Of course you know that I know you were at the Cahors
Assizes, Juve? What was your impression of the whole affair—of
the verdict, and of Etienne Rambert's guilt or innocence?"</p>
<p>Juve got up and began to walk up and down the room, followed
by the magistrate's eyes. He seemed to be hesitating as to
whether he would answer at all, but finally he stopped abruptly
and faced his friend.</p>
<p>"If I were talking to anybody but you, M. Fuselier, I would either
not answer at all, or I would give an answer that was no answer!
But as it is——, well, in my opinion, the Langrune case is
only just beginning, and nothing certain is known at all."</p>
<p>"According to that, Charles Rambert is innocent?"</p>
<p>"I don't say that."</p>
<p>"What then? I suppose you don't think the father was the
murderer?"</p>
<p>"The hypothesis is not absurd! But there! What is the real
truth of the whole affair? That is what I am wondering all the
time. That murder is never out of my head; it interests me more
and more every day. Oh, yes, I've got lots of ideas, but they are
all utterly vague and improbable: sometimes my imagination
seems to be running away with me."</p>
<p>He stopped, and M. Fuselier wagged a mocking finger at him.</p>
<p>"Juve," he said, "I charge you formally with attempting to implicate
Fantômas in the murder of the Marquise de Langrune!"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_120">[120]</a></span></p>
<p>The detective replied in the same tone of raillery.</p>
<p>"Guilty, my lord!"</p>
<p>"Good lord, man!" the magistrate exclaimed, "Fantômas is a
perfect obsession with you," and as Juve acquiesced with a laugh
the magistrate dropped his bantering tone. "Shall I tell you
something, Juve? I too am beginning to have an obsession for
that fantastic miscreant! And what I want to know is why you
have not come to me before to ask me about that sensational
robbery at the Royal Palace Hotel?"</p>
<p>"The robbery from Princess Sonia Danidoff?"</p>
<p>"Yes: the Fantômas robbery!"</p>
<p>"Fantômas, eh?" Juve protested. "That remains to be seen."</p>
<p>"Why, man," M. Fuselier retorted, "you have heard that detail
about the card the man left, haven't you?—the visiting card that
was blank when the Princess found it, and on which the name of
Fantômas afterwards became visible?"</p>
<p>"There's no Fantômas about that, in my opinion."</p>
<p>"Why not?"</p>
<p>"Well, it isn't one of Fantômas' little ways to leave clear traces
behind him. One might as well picture him committing robbery
or murder in a cap with a neat little band round it: 'Fantômas
and Co.' He might even add 'Discretion and Dispatch!' No, it's
most unlikely."</p>
<p>"You don't think Fantômas capable of throwing down his
glove to the police in the shape of some such material proof of
his identity?"</p>
<p>"I always base my arguments on the balance of probabilities,"
Juve replied. "What emerges from this Royal Palace story is that
some common hotel thief conceived the ingenious idea of casting
suspicion on Fantômas: it was just a trick to mislead the police:
at least, that is my opinion."</p>
<p>But M. Fuselier declined to be convinced.</p>
<p>"No, you are wrong, Juve: it was no common hotel thief who
stole Mme. Van den Rosen's necklace and Princess Sonia's hundred
and twenty thousand francs; the prize was big enough to
appeal to Fantômas: and the amazing audacity of the crime is
suggestive too. Just think what coolness the man must have had<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_121">[121]</a></span>
to be able to paralyse the Princess's power of resistance when
she tried to call for help: and also to get clear away in spite of
the hosts of servants in the hotel and all the precautions taken!"</p>
<p>"Tell me all about the robbery, M. Fuselier," said Juve.</p>
<p>The magistrate sat down at his desk and took up the notes he
had made in the course of his official enquiry that day. He told
Juve everything he had been able to elicit.</p>
<p>"The most amazing thing to me," he said in conclusion, "is the
way the fellow, when he had once got out of Princess Sonia's
room, contrived to get into the lift, shed his evening dress, get
into livery, and make his first attempt to escape. When the hall
porter stopped him he did not lose his head, but got into the lift
again, sent that flying up to the top of the hotel with the clothes
that would have betrayed him, calmly presented himself before
Muller, the night watchman, and contrived to be told to go for
the police, ran down the stairs again, and took advantage of the
night watchman's telephoning to the hall porter to get the latter
to open the door for him, and so marched off as easily as you
please. A man who kept his nerve like that and could make such
amazing use of every circumstance, who was so quick and daring,
and who was capable of carrying through such a difficult
comedy in the middle of the general uproar, richly deserves to
be taken for Fantômas!"</p>
<p>Juve sat in deep consideration of the whole story.</p>
<p>"That isn't what interests me most," he said at last. "His escape
from the hotel might have been effected by any clever
thief. What I think more remarkable is the means he took to
prevent the Princess from screaming when he was just leaving
her rooms: that really was masterly. Instead of trying to get her
as far away as possible and shut her up in her bedroom, to take
her with him to the very door opening on to the corridor, where
the faintest cry might have involved the worst possible consequences,
and to be sure that the terror he had inspired would
prevent her from uttering that cry, to be able to assume that the
victim was so overwrought that she would make no effort at all
and could do nothing—that is really very good indeed: quite admirable
psychology! Fine work!"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_122">[122]</a></span></p>
<p>"So you see there are some unusual features in the case," said
M. Fuselier complacently: "this, for instance: why do you suppose
the fellow stayed such a long time with the Princess and
went through all that comedy business in the bathroom? Don't
forget that she came in late, and it is extremely probable that he
might have finished his job before she returned."</p>
<p>Juve passed his hand through his hair, a characteristic trick
when his mind was working.</p>
<p>"I can imagine only one answer to that question, M. Fuselier.
But you have inspected the scene of the crime: tell me first,
where do you think the rascal was hidden?"</p>
<p>"Oh, I can answer that definitely. The Princess's suite of
rooms ends in the bathroom, you know, and the chief things
there are the famous bath, some cupboards, and a shower bath:
the shower bath is one of those large model Norchers with lateral
as well as vertical sprays, and a waterproof curtain hanging
from rings at the top right down to the tub at the bottom. There
were footmarks on the enamel of the tub, so it is clear that the
thief hid there, behind the curtain, until the Princess got into
her bath."</p>
<p>"And I suppose the shower bath is in the corner of the room
near the window?" Juve went on. "And the window was partly
open, or had been until the maid went in to prepare her mistress's
bath? It's quite interesting! The man had just succeeded
in stealing the necklace from Mme. Van den Rosen, whose
rooms are next to Princess Sonia's: for some reason or other he
had not been able to escape through the corridor, and so he naturally
made up his mind to get into the Princess's suite, which
he did by the simple process of stepping over the railing on the
balcony and walking in through the open window of the
dressing-room."</p>
<p>"And then Nadine came in, and he had to hide?"</p>
<p>"No, no!" said Juve, "you are getting on too fast. If that had
been so, there would have been no need for all the bath business;
besides, the Princess was robbed, too, you know. That was
not just chance, it was planned; and so if the thief hid in the
shower bath he did so on purpose to wait for the Princess."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_123">[123]</a></span></p>
<p>"But he did not want her!" Fuselier retorted: "very much the
reverse. If he was in the room before anybody else, all he had to
do was, take the pocket-book and go!"</p>
<p>"Not a bit of it!" said Juve. "This robbery took place at the end
of the month, when the Princess would have big monthly bills to
meet, as the thief must have known. He must have found out
that she had withdrawn her portfolio and money from the custody
of the hotel. But he must have been ignorant of where she
had placed the portfolio; and he waited for her to ask her—and
she told him!"</p>
<p>"That's a pretty tall yarn!" M. Fuselier protested. "What on
earth do you base it all upon? The Princess would never have
shown the man the drawer where the money was taken from!"</p>
<p>"Yes, she did!" said Juve. "Look here: this is what happened:
the fellow wanted to steal this pocket-book, and did not know
where it was. He hid in the shower bath and waited, either for
the Princess to go to bed or take a bath, either of which would
place her at his mercy. When the lady was in the bath he appeared,
threatened her, until she was terrified, and then bucked
her up a bit again and hit on the dodge of putting out the electric
light—not out of respect for her wounded feelings, but simply
in order to get a chance to search through her clothes and
make sure that the pocket-book was not there. I am convinced
that if he had found it then he would have bolted at once. But
he didn't find it. So he went to the end of the next room and
waited for the Princess to come to him there, which is precisely
what she did. He did not know where the money was, so he
watched every movement of her eyes and saw them go automatically
towards the drawer and stay there; then he slipped his
card into the drawer, abstracted the pocket-book, and took his
leave, driving his impudence and skill to the length of making
her see him to the door!"</p>
<p>"Upon my word, Juve, you are a wonder," M. Fuselier said admiringly.
"I've spent the entire day cross-examining everybody
in the hotel, and came to no definite conclusion; and you, who
have not seen anything or anybody connected with it, sit in that
chair and in five minutes clear up the entire mystery. What a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_124">[124]</a></span>
pity you won't believe that Fantômas had a finger in this pie!
What a pity you won't take up the search!"</p>
<p>Juve paid no heed to the compliments to his skill. He took out
his watch and looked at the time.</p>
<p>"I must go," he said; "it's quite time I was at my own work.
Well, we may not have been wasting our time, M. Fuselier. I
admit I had not paid much attention to the Royal Palace Hotel
robbery. You have really interested me in it. I won't make any
promises, but I think I shall very likely come again in a day or
two for another talk with you about the case. It really interests
me now. And when once I'm quit of one or two pressing jobs, I
don't say I shan't ask leave to go thoroughly into it with you."</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_125">[125]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XII. A Knock-out Blow</span></h2>
<p>The staff of the Royal Palace Hotel were just finishing dinner,
and the greatest animation prevailed in the vast white-tiled
servants' hall. The tone of the conversation varied at different
tables, for the servants jealously observed a strict order of precedence
among themselves, but the present topic was the same at
all, the recent sensational robbery from Mme. Van den Rosen
and the Princess Sonia Danidoff. At one table, smaller than the
rest, a party of upper servants sat, under-managers or heads of
departments: M. Louis was here, the general manager, M.
Muller the superintendent of the second floor, M. Ludovic chief
valet, M. Maurice head footman, M. Naud chief cashier, and last
but not least Mlle. Jeanne the young lady cashier whose special
duty it was to take charge of all the moneys and valuables deposited
in the custody of the hotel by guests who wished to relieve
themselves of the responsibility of keeping these in their
own rooms. This small and select company was increased to-night
by the addition of M. Henri Verbier, a man of about forty
years of age, who had left the branch hotel at Cairo belonging to
the same Company to join the staff at the Royal Palace Hotel in
Paris.</p>
<p>"I am afraid, M. Verbier, you will form a very bad opinion of
our establishment," said M. Muller to him. "It is really a pity
that you should have left the Cairo branch and come here just
when these robberies have put the Royal Palace under a cloud."</p>
<p>Henri Verbier smiled.</p>
<p>"You need not be afraid of my attaching too much importance
to that," he said. "I've been in hotel life for fifteen years now, in<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_126">[126]</a></span>
one capacity or another, and, as you may suppose, I've known
similar cases before, so they don't surprise me much. But one
thing does surprise me, M. Muller, and that is that no clue has
yet been found. I suppose the Board have done everything that
can be done to trace the culprit? The reputation of the hotel is
at stake."</p>
<p>"I should think they have looked for him!" said M. Louis, with
a pathetic shrug of his shoulders. "Why, they even upbraided me
for having had the door opened for the thief! Luckily I had a
good friend in Muller, who admitted that he had been completely
imposed upon and that he had given the order for the
fellow, whom he supposed to be the second-floor waiter, to be
allowed to go out. I knew nothing about it."</p>
<p>"And how was I to guess that the man was an impostor?"
Muller protested.</p>
<p>"All the same," Henri Verbier retorted, "it is uncommonly annoying
for everybody when things like that happen."</p>
<p>"So long as one has not committed any breach of orders, and
so can't be made a scapegoat of, one mustn't grumble," M.
Muller said. "Louis and I did exactly what our duty required and
no one can say anything to us. The magistrate acknowledged
that a week ago."</p>
<p>"He does not suspect anybody?" Henri Verbier asked.</p>
<p>"No: nobody," Muller answered.</p>
<p>M. Louis smiled.</p>
<p>"Yes, he did suspect somebody, Verbier," he said, "and that
was your charming neighbour Mlle. Jeanne there."</p>
<p>Verbier turned towards the young cashier.</p>
<p>"What? The magistrate tried to make out that you were implicated
in it?"</p>
<p>The girl had only spoken a few words during the whole of dinner,
although Henri Verbier had made several gallant attempts
to draw her into the general conversation. Now she laughingly
protested.</p>
<p>"M. Louis only says that to tease me."</p>
<p>But M. Louis stuck to his guns.</p>
<p>"Not a bit of it, Mademoiselle Jeanne: I said it because it is<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_127">[127]</a></span>
the truth. The magistrate was on to you: I tell you he was! Why,
M. Verbier, he cross-examined her for more than half an hour
after the general confrontation, while he finished with Muller
and me in less than ten minutes."</p>
<p>"Gad, M. Louis, a magistrate is a man, isn't he?" said Henri
Verbier gallantly. "The magistrate may have enjoyed talking to
Mlle. Jeanne more than he did to you, if I may suggest it without
seeming rude."</p>
<p>There was a general laugh at this sally on the part of the new
superintendent, and then M. Louis continued:</p>
<p>"Well, if he wanted to make up to her he went a funny way to
work, for he made her angry."</p>
<p>"Did he really?" said Henri Verbier, turning again to the girl.
"Why did the magistrate cross-examine you so much?"</p>
<p>The young cashier shrugged her shoulders.</p>
<p>"We have thrashed it out so often, M. Verbier! But I will tell
you the whole story: during the morning of the day when the
robbery was committed I had returned to Princess Sonia
Danidoff the pocket-book containing a hundred and twenty
thousand francs which she had given into my custody a few days
before; I could not refuse to give it to her when she asked for it,
could I? How was I to know that it would be stolen from her the
same evening? Customers deposit their valuables with me and I
hand them a receipt: they give me back the receipt when they
demand their valuables, and all I have to do is comply with their
request, without asking questions. Isn't that so?"</p>
<p>"But that was not what puzzled the magistrate I suppose,"
said Henri Verbier. "You are the custodian of all valuables, and
you only complied strictly with your orders."</p>
<p>"Yes," M. Muller broke in, "but Mlle. Jeanne has only told you
part of the story. Just fancy: only a few minutes before the robbery
Mme. Van den Rosen had asked Mlle. Jeanne to take
charge of her diamond necklace, and Mlle. Jeanne had refused!"</p>
<p>"That really was bad luck for you," said Henri Verbier to the
girl with a laugh, "and I quite understand that the magistrate
thought it rather odd."</p>
<p>"They are unkind!" she protested. "From the way they put it,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_128">[128]</a></span>
M. Verbier, you really might think that I refused to take charge
of Mme. Van den Rosen's jewellery in order to make things easy
for the thief, which is as much as to say that I was his accomplice."</p>
<p>"That is precisely what the magistrate did think," M. Louis
interpolated.</p>
<p>The girl took no notice of the interruption, but went on with
her explanation to Henri Verbier.</p>
<p>"What happened was this: the rule is that I am at the disposal
of customers, to take charge of deposits or to return them to the
owners, until nine <span class="smcap">p.m.</span>, and until nine <span class="smcap">p.m.</span> only. After that, my
time is up, and all I have to do is lock my safe and go: I am free
until nine o'clock next morning. You know that it does not do to
take liberties in a position like mine. So when, on the day of the
robbery, Mme. Van den Rosen came with her diamond necklace
at half-past nine, I was perfectly within my rights in refusing to
accept the deposit."</p>
<p>"That's right enough," said M. Muller, who, having finished
his dessert, was now sipping coffee into which he had tipped
sugar until it was as thick as syrup: "but you were disobliging, my
dear young lady, and that was what struck the magistrate; for really
it would not have been much trouble to register the new deposit
and take charge of Mme. Van den Rosen's necklace for
her."</p>
<p>"No, it wouldn't," the girl replied; "but when there is a rule it
seems to me that it ought to be obeyed. My time is up at nine
o'clock, and I am forbidden to accept any deposits after nine o'clock:
and that's why I refused that lady's. I was perfectly right;
and I should do the same again, if the same thing happened."</p>
<p>Henri Verbier was manifestly anxious to conciliate the young
cashier. He expressed his approval of her conduct now.</p>
<p>"I quite agree with you, it never does to put interpretations
upon orders. It was your duty to close your safe at nine o'clock,
and you did close it then, and no one can say anything to you.
But, joking apart, what did the magistrate want?"</p>
<p>The girl shrugged her shoulders with a gesture of indifference.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_129">[129]</a></span></p>
<p>"You see I was right just now: M. Louis is only trying to tease
me by saying that the magistrate cross-examined me severely. As
a matter of fact I was simply asked what I have just told you, and
when I gave all this explanation, no fault at all was found with
me." As she spoke, Mlle. Jeanne folded her napkin carefully,
pushed back her chair and shook hands with her two neighbours
at table. "Good night," she said. "I am going up to bed."</p>
<p>Mlle. Jeanne had hardly left the room before Henri Verbier
also rose from the table and prepared to follow her example.</p>
<p>M. Louis gave M. Muller a friendly dig in his comfortable
paunch.</p>
<p>"A pound to a penny," he said, "that friend Verbier means to
make up to Mlle. Jeanne. Well, I wish him luck! But that young
lady is not very easy to tame!"</p>
<p>"You didn't succeed," M. Muller replied unkindly, "but it
doesn't follow that nobody else will!"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>M. Louis was not deceived: Henri Verbier evidently did think
his neighbour at table a very charming young woman.</p>
<p>Mlle. Jeanne had hardly reached her room on the fifth floor
of the hotel, and flung open her window to gaze over the magnificent
panorama spread out below her and inhale the still
night air, when a gentle tap fell upon the door and, complying
with her summons to come in, Henri Verbier entered the room.</p>
<p>"My room is next to yours," he said, "and as I saw you were
standing dreaming at your window I thought perhaps you would
condescend to smoke an Egyptian cigarette. I have brought
some back from Cairo: it is very mild tobacco—real ladies'
tobacco."</p>
<p>The girl laughed and took a dainty cigarette from the case
that Henri Verbier offered her.</p>
<p>"It's very kind of you to think of me," she said. "I don't make
a habit of smoking, but I let myself be tempted sometimes."</p>
<p>"If I have been kind, you can show your gratitude very easily,"
Henri Verbier replied: "by allowing me to stay here a few minutes
and smoke a cigarette with you."</p>
<p>"By all means," said Mlle. Jeanne. "I love to spend a little time<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_130">[130]</a></span>
at my window at night, to get the air before going to bed. You
will prevent me from getting tired of my own company, and can
tell me all about Cairo."</p>
<p>"I'm afraid I know very little about Cairo," Henri Verbier
replied; "you see I spent almost the whole of my time in the
hotel. But as you seem so kind and so friendly disposed I wish
you would tell me things."</p>
<p>"But I am a very ignorant young woman."</p>
<p>"You are a woman, and that's enough. Listen: I am a new-comer
here, and I am quite aware that my arrival, and my position,
will make me some enemies. Now, whom ought I to be on
my guard against? Who is there, among the staff, of whom I
ought to be careful as doubtful associates? I ask with all the
more concern because I will tell you frankly that I had no personal
introduction to the Board: I have not got the same chance
that you have."</p>
<p>"How do you know I had any introduction?" the girl enquired.</p>
<p>"Gad, I'm sure of it," Henri Verbier answered: he was leaning
his elbows on the window-sill and gradually drawing closer to
the young cashier. "I don't suppose that an important position
like the one you hold, requiring absolute integrity and competence,
is given without fullest investigation. Your work is not tiring,
but that does not mean it would be entrusted to anybody."</p>
<p>"You are quite right, M. Verbier: I did have an introduction to
the Board: and I had first-rate testimonials too."</p>
<p>"Have you been in business long? Two years—three years?"</p>
<p>"Yes," Mlle. Jeanne replied, purposely refraining from being
explicit.</p>
<p>"I only asked because I fancy I have seen you before somewhere.
I recognise your eyes!" Henri Verbier smiled, and looked
meaningly at the girl. "Mlle. Jeanne, on summer nights like this,
when you are looking at a lovely view like this, don't you have a
funny sort of feeling?"</p>
<p>"No. What do you mean?"</p>
<p>"Oh, I don't know. But you see, I'm a sentimental chap unfortunately,
and I really suffer a lot from always living in lonely<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_131">[131]</a></span>
isolation, without any affection: there are times when I feel as if
love were an absolute necessity."</p>
<p>The cashier looked at him ironically.</p>
<p>"That's all foolishness. Love is only stupid, and ought to be
guarded against as the worst possible mistake. Love always
means misery for working people like us."</p>
<p>"It is you who are foolish," Henri Verbier protested gently, "or
else you are mischievous. No: love is not stupid for working people
like us; on the contrary, it is the only means we have of attaining
perfect happiness. Lovers are rich!"</p>
<p>"In wealth that lets them die of hunger," she scoffed.</p>
<p>"No, no," he answered: "no. Look here: all to-day you and I
have been working hard, earning our living; well, suppose you
were not laughing at me but we were really lovers, would not
this be the time to enjoy the living we have earned?" and as the
girl did not reply, Henri Verbier, who like an experienced wooer
had been drawing closer to her all the time, until now his shoulder
was touching hers, took her hand. "Would not this be
sweet?" he said. "I should take your little fingers into mine—like
this; I should look at them so tenderly, and raise them to my
lips——"</p>
<p>But the girl wrested herself away.</p>
<p>"Let me go! I won't have it! Do you understand?" And then,
to mitigate the sharpness of her rebuke, and also to change the
conversation, she said: "It is beginning to turn cold. I will put a
cloak over my shoulders," and she moved away from the window
to unhook a cloak from a peg on the wall.</p>
<p>Henri Verbier watched her without moving.</p>
<p>"How unkind you are!" he said reproachfully, disregarding the
angry gleam in her eyes. "Can it really be wrong to enjoy a kiss,
on a lovely night like this? If you are cold, Mademoiselle Jeanne,
there is a better way of getting warm than by putting a wrap over
one's shoulders: and that is by resting in someone else's arms."</p>
<p>He put out his arms as he spoke, ready to catch the girl as she
came across the room, and was on the very point of taking her
into his arms as he had suggested, when she broke from his
grasp with a sudden turn and, furious with rage, dealt him a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_132">[132]</a></span>
tremendous blow right on the temple. With a stifled groan,
Henri Verbier dropped unconscious to the floor.</p>
<p>Mlle. Jeanne stared at him for a moment, as if dumbfounded.
Then with quite amazing rapidity the young cashier
sprang to the window and hurriedly closed it. She took down her
hat from a hook on the wall, and put it on with a single gesture,
opened a drawer and took out a little bag, and then, after listening
for a minute to make sure that there was nobody in the
passage outside her room, she opened her door, went out,
rapidly turned the key behind her and ran down the stairs.</p>
<p>Two minutes later Mlle. Jeanne smilingly passed the porter
on duty and wished him good night.</p>
<p>"Bye-bye," she said. "I'm going out to get a little fresh air!"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Slowly, as if emerging from some extraordinary dream, Henri
Verbier began to recover from his brief unconsciousness: he
could not understand at first what had happened to him, why he
was lying on the floor, why his head ached so much, or why his
blood-shot eyes saw everything through a mist. He gradually
struggled into a sitting posture and looked around the room.</p>
<p>"Nobody here!" he muttered. Then as if the sound of his own
voice had brought him back to life, he got up and hurried to the
door and shook it furiously. "Locked!" he growled angrily. "And
I can call till I'm black in the face! No one has come upstairs yet.
I'm trapped!" He turned towards the window, with some idea of
calling for help, but as he passed the mirror over the mantelpiece
he caught sight of his own reflection and saw the bruise on
his forehead, with a tiny stream of blood beginning to trickle
from a cut in the skin. He went close to the glass and looked at
himself in dismay. "Juve though I am," he murmured, "I've let
myself be knocked out by a woman!" And then Juve, for Juve it
was, cleverly disguised, uttered a sudden oath, clenching his
fists and grinding his teeth in rage. "Confound it all, I'll take my
oath that blow was never dealt by any woman!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_133">[133]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XIII. Thérèse's Future</span></h2>
<p>M. Etienne Rambert was in the smoking-room of the house
which he had purchased a few months previously in the
Place Pereire, rue Eugène-Flachat, smoking and chatting with
his old friend Barbey, who also was his banker. The two had
been discussing investments, and the wealthy merchant had displayed
considerable indifference to the banker's recommendation
of various gilt-edged securities.</p>
<p>"To tell you the truth, my dear fellow," he said at length,
"these things interest me very little; I've got used to big enterprises—am
almost what you would call a plunger. Of course you
know that nothing is so risky as the development of rubber plantations.
No doubt the industry has prospered amazingly since
the boom in motor-cars began, but you must remember that I
went into it when no one could possibly foresee the immense
market that the new means of locomotion would open for our
produce. That's enough to prove to you that I'm no coward
when it's a question of risking money." The banker nodded: his
friend certainly did display a quite extraordinary energy and
will-power for a man of his age. "As a matter of fact," M.
Rambert went on, "any business of which I am not actually a director,
interests me only slightly. You know I am not boasting
when I say that my fortune is large enough to justify me in incurring
a certain amount of financial risk without having to fear
any serious modification of my social position if the ventures
should happen to turn out ill. I've got the sporting instinct."</p>
<p>"It's a fine one," M. Barbey said with some enthusiasm. "And
I don't mind telling you that if I were not your banker, and so<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_134">[134]</a></span>
had a certain responsibility in your case, I should not hesitate to
put a scheme before you that has been running in my head for
a year or two now."</p>
<p>"A scheme of your own, Barbey?" said M. Rambert. "How is
it you have never told me about it? I should have thought we
were close enough friends for that."</p>
<p>The hint of reproach in the words pricked the banker, and
also encouraged him to proceed.</p>
<p>"It's rather a delicate matter, and you will understand my hesitation
when I tell you—for I'll burn my boats now—that it isn't
any ordinary speculation, such as I am in the habit of recommending
to my customers. It is a speculation in which I am interested
personally: in short, I want to increase the capital of my
Bank, and convert my House into a really large concern."</p>
<p>"Oh-ho!" said M. Etienne Rambert, half to himself. "Well,
you are quite right, Barbey. But if you want to suggest that I
shall help to finance it, you had better put all the cards on the
table and let me know exactly what the position is; I need not say
that if nothing comes of it, I shall regard any information you
give me as absolutely confidential."</p>
<p>The two men plunged into the subject, and for a good half-hour
discussed it in all its bearings, making endless calculations
and contemplating all contingencies. At last M. Rambert threw
down his pen and looked up.</p>
<p>"I'm accustomed to the American method of hustle, Barbey.
In principle I like your proposition quite well; but I won't be
one of your financial partners; if the thing goes through I'll be
the only one, or not one at all. I know what is in your mind," he
went on with a smile, as he noticed the banker's surprise; "you
know what my fortune is, or rather you think you do, and you
are wondering where I shall get the million sterling, or thereabouts,
that you want. Well, make your mind easy about that; if
I talk like this, it's because I've got it." The banker's bow was
very deferent, and M. Rambert continued: "Yes, the last year or
two have been good, even very good, for me. I've made some
lucky speculations and my capital has further been increased by
some lotteries which have turned out right quite lately. Well!" he<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_135">[135]</a></span>
broke off with a sigh, "I suppose one can't always be unlucky in
everything, though money can't cure, or even touch, the wounds
in one's heart."</p>
<p>The banker made no answer: he shrank from waking, by untimely
words, the sad memories which were hardly dormant yet
in the old man's mind. But M. Rambert soon reverted to his
business tone.</p>
<p>"I'm quite disposed to be interested in a financial venture like
yours, Barbey. But you must understand that you will have a
good deal more than a sleeping partner in me. Will that suit
you? I should not ask you to abdicate your authority, but I tell
you frankly I should follow all the operations of your house very
closely indeed."</p>
<p>"There shall be no secrets from you, my dear friend, my dear
partner, if I may call you that," said M. Barbey, rising: "quite the
contrary!"</p>
<p>The banker looked towards the mantelpiece, as if expecting to
see a clock there; M. Rambert understood the instinctive action
and drew out his watch.</p>
<p>"Twenty minutes to eleven, Barbey: late hours for you. So off
with you." He cut short the banker's half-hearted apologies for
not prolonging the evening. "I am turning you out quite unceremoniously,
my dear chap, and besides, as you know, I'm not
lonely to-night as I generally am. I have a young and very
charming companion, for whom I have the greatest possible affection,
and I am going to join her."</p>
<p>M. Etienne Rambert conducted his friend to the hall door,
heard the sound of his motor-car die away in the distance, and
then walked across the hall and, instead of going back to the
smoking-room, turned into the adjoining drawing-room. He
paused for a moment in the doorway, tenderly contemplating
the charming spectacle that met his eyes.</p>
<p>The shaded light from an electric lamp fell upon the bent
head, oval face and delicate features of Thérèse Auvernois, who
was intent upon a book. The girl was emerging from childhood
into young womanhood now, and sorrow had heightened her
natural distinction by giving her a stamp of gravity that was new.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_136">[136]</a></span>
Her figure showed slight and supple, delicate and graceful, and
her long, tapered fingers turned over the pages of the book with
slow and regular movement. Thérèse looked round towards
Etienne Rambert when she heard him coming in, and laying
down her book she came forward to meet him, moving with a
very graceful, easy carriage.</p>
<p>"I am sure I am keeping you up most dreadfully late, dear M.
Rambert," she said apologetically, "but what am I to do? I must
wait for the Baronne de Vibray, and the dear thing is so often
late!"</p>
<p>The tragedy at the château of Beaulieu had had one effect in
knitting all the friends of the Marquise de Langrune in closer
bonds of friendship. Prior to that event Etienne Rambert had
scarcely known the Baronne de Vibray; now the two were intimate
friends. The Baronne had not desisted from her first generous
effort until she had persuaded the family council to appoint
her guardian of the orphaned Thérèse Auvernois. At first she had
installed the child at Querelles, and remained there with her,
leading the quietest possible life, partly out of respect for
Thérèse's grief, and partly because she herself was also much
upset by the distressing tragedy. She had even enjoyed the rest,
and her new interest in playing mother, or rather elder sister, to
Thérèse. But as the weeks went by and time accomplished its
healing work, Paris called to the Baronne once more, and yielding
to the solicitations of her many friends she brought her new ward
to the capital and settled in a little flat in the rue Boissy-d'Anglais.
At first she protested that she would go out nowhere, or at most
pay only absolutely necessary visits, but by degrees she accepted
first one and then many invitations, though always deploring the
necessity of leaving Thérèse for several hours at a time.</p>
<p>Happily there was always Etienne Rambert, who was also
staying in Paris just now. It had gradually become the custom of
the Baronne de Vibray, when she was dining out, to entrust
Thérèse to Etienne Rambert's care, and the young girl and the
old man got on together perfectly. Their hearts had met across
the awful chasm that fate had tried to cut between them.</p>
<p>To Thérèse's last words now Etienne Rambert replied:<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_137">[137]</a></span></p>
<p>"You need not apologise for staying late, dear; you know how
glad I am to see you. I wish the house were yours."</p>
<p>The girl glanced round the room that had grown so familiar
to her, and with a sudden rush of feeling slipped her arm around
the old man's neck and laid her fair head on his shoulder.</p>
<p>"I should so love to stay here with you, M. Rambert!"</p>
<p>The old man looked oddly at her for a moment, repressing
the words that he might perhaps have wished to say, and then
gently released himself from her affectionate clasp and led her
to a sofa, on which he sat down by her side.</p>
<p>"That is one of the things that we must not allow ourselves to
think about, my dear," he said. "I should have rejoiced to receive
you in my home, and your presence, and the brightness of your
dear fair face would have given a charm to my lonely fireside;
but unfortunately those are vain dreams. We have to reckon
with the world, and the world would not approve of a young girl
like you living in the home of a lonely man."</p>
<p>"Why not?" Thérèse enquired in surprise. "Why, you might
be my father."</p>
<p>Etienne Rambert winced at the word.</p>
<p>"Ah!" he said, "you must not forget, Thérèse, that I am not
your father, but—his: the father of him who——" but Thérèse's
soft hand laid upon his lips prevented him from finishing what
he would have said.</p>
<p>To change the conversation Thérèse feigned concern about
her own future.</p>
<p>"When we left Querelles," she said, "President Bonnet told
me that you would tell me something about my affairs. I gather
that my fortune is not a very brilliant one."</p>
<p>It was indeed the fact that after the murder of the Marquise
the unpleasant discovery had been made that her fortune was by
no means so considerable as had generally been supposed. The
estate was mortgaged, and President Bonnet and Etienne
Rambert had had long and anxious debates as to whether it
might not be well for Thérèse to renounce her inheritance to
Beaulieu, so doubtful did it seem whether the assets would exceed
the liabilities.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_138">[138]</a></span></p>
<p>Etienne Rambert made a vague, but significant gesture when
he heard the girl raise the point now, but Thérèse had all the
carelessness of youth.</p>
<p>"Oh, I shall not be down-hearted," she exclaimed. "My poor
grannie always gave me an example of energy and hard work;
I've got plenty of pluck, and I will work too. Suppose I turn governess?"</p>
<p>M. Rambert looked at her thoughtfully.</p>
<p>"My dear child, I know how brave and earnest you are, and
that gives me confidence. I have thought about your future a
great deal already. Some day, of course, some nice and wealthy
young fellow will come along and marry you—— Oh, yes, he
will: you'll see. But in the meantime it will be necessary for you
to have some occupation. I am wondering whether it will not be
necessary to let, or even to sell Beaulieu. And, on the other
hand, you can't always stay with the Baronne de Vibray."</p>
<p>"No, I realise that," said Thérèse, who, with the native tact
that was one of her best qualities, had quickly seen that it would
not be long before she would become a difficulty in the way of
the independence of the kind Baronne. "That is what troubles
me most."</p>
<p>"Your birth and your upbringing have been such that you
would certainly suffer much in taking up the difficult and delicate,
and sometimes painful, position of governess in a family;
and, without wishing to be offensive, I must remind you that you
need to have studied very hard to be a governess nowadays, and
I am not aware that you are exactly a blue-stocking. But I have
an idea, and this is it: for a great many years now I have been on
the very friendliest terms with a lady who belongs to the very
best English society: Lady Beltham; you may perhaps have
heard me speak of her." Thérèse opened wide eyes of astonishment,
and Rambert went on: "A few months ago Lady Beltham
lost her husband in strange circumstances, and since then she
has been good enough to give me more of her confidence than
previously. She is immensely rich, and very charitable, and I
have frequently been asked by her to look after some of her
many financial interests. Now I have often noticed that she has<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_139">[139]</a></span>
with her several young English ladies who live with her, not as
companions, but, shall I say, secretaries? Do you understand the
difference? She treats them like friends or relatives, and they all
belong to the very best social class, some of them indeed being
daughters of English peers. If Lady Beltham, to whom I could
speak about it, would admit you into her little company, I am
sure you would be in a most delightful <i>milieu</i>, and Lady
Beltham, whom, I know, you would please, would almost certainly
interest herself in your future. She knows what unhappiness
is as well as you do, my dear," he added, bending fondly
over the girl, "and she would understand you."</p>
<p>"Dear M. Rambert!" murmured Thérèse, much moved: "do
that; speak to Lady Beltham about me; I should be so glad!"</p>
<p>Thérèse did not finish all she would have said. A loud ring at
the front door bell broke in upon her words, and Etienne
Rambert rose and walked across the room.</p>
<p>"That must be the good Baronne de Vibray come for you," he
said.</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_140">[140]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XIV. Mademoiselle Jeanne</span></h2>
<p>After she had so roughly disposed of the enterprising Henri
Verbier, whose most unseemly advances had so greatly
scandalised her, Mlle. Jeanne took to her heels, directly she was
out of sight of the Royal Palace Hotel, and ran like one possessed.
She stood for a moment in the brilliantly lighted, traffic-crowded
Avenue Wagram, shaking with excitement and with
palpitating heart, and then mechanically hailed a passing cab
and told the driver to take her towards the Bois. There she gave
another heedless order to go to the boulevard Saint-Denis, but
as the cab approached the place de l'Etoile she realised that she
was once more near the Royal Palace Hotel, and stopping the
driver by the tram lines she dismissed him and got into a tram
that was going to the station of Auteuil. It was just half-past
eleven when she reached the station.</p>
<p>"When is the next train for Saint-Lazaire?" she asked.</p>
<p>She learned that one was starting almost at once, and hurriedly
taking a second-class ticket she jumped into a ladies' carriage
and went as far as Courcelles. There she alighted, went out
of the station, looked around her for a minute or two to get her
bearings, and then walked slowly towards the rue Eugène-Flachat.
She hesitated a second, and then walked firmly towards
a particular house, and rang the bell.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>"A lady to see you, sir," the footman said to M. Rambert.</p>
<p>"Bring her in here at once," said M. Rambert, supposing that
the man had kept the Baronne de Vibray waiting in the anteroom.</p>
<p>The drawing-room door was opened a little way, and someone<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_141">[141]</a></span>
came in and stepped quickly into the shadow by the door.
Thérèse, who had risen to hurry towards the visitor, stopped
short when she perceived that it was a stranger and not her
guardian. Noticing her action, M. Etienne Rambert turned and
looked at the person who had entered.</p>
<p>It was a lady.</p>
<p>"To what am I indebted——" he began with a bow; and then,
having approached the visitor, he broke off short. "Good
heavens——!"</p>
<p>The bell rang a second time, and on this occasion the
Baronne de Vibray hurried into the room, a radiant incarnation
of gaiety.</p>
<p>"I am most dreadfully late!" she exclaimed, and was hurrying
towards M. Etienne Rambert with outstretched hands, full of
some amusing story she had to tell him, when she too caught
sight of the strange lady standing stiffly in the corner of the
room, with downcast eyes.</p>
<p>Etienne Rambert repressed his first emotion, smiled to the
Baronne, and then went towards the mysterious lady.</p>
<p>"Madame," he said, not a muscle of his face moving, "may I
trouble you to come into my study?"</p>
<p>"Who is that lady, M. Rambert?" said Thérèse when presently
M. Rambert came back into the drawing-room. "And how white
you are!"</p>
<p>M. Rambert forced a smile.</p>
<p>"I am rather tired, dear. I have had a great deal to do these
last few days."</p>
<p>The Baronne de Vibray was full of instant apologies.</p>
<p>"It is all my fault," she exclaimed. "I am dreadfully sorry to
have kept you up so late," and in a few minutes more the
Baronne's car was speeding towards the rue Boissy-d'Anglais.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>M. Rambert hurried back to his study, shut and locked the
door behind him, and almost sprang towards the unknown lady,
his fists clenched, his eyes starting out of his head.</p>
<p>"Charles!" he exclaimed.</p>
<p>"Papa!" the girl replied, and sank upon a sofa.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_142">[142]</a></span></p>
<p>There was silence. Etienne Rambert seemed utterly dumbfounded.</p>
<p>"I won't, I won't remain disguised as a woman any longer. I've
done with it. I cannot bear it!" the strange creature murmured.</p>
<p>"You must!" said Rambert harshly, imperiously. "I insist!"</p>
<p>The pseudo Mlle. Jeanne slowly took off the heavy wig that
concealed her real features, and tore away the corsage that compressed
her bosom, revealing the strong and muscular frame of
a young man.</p>
<p>"No, I will not," replied the strange individual, to whom M.
Rambert had not hesitated to give the name of Charles. "I
would rather anything else happened."</p>
<p>"You have got to expiate," Etienne Rambert said with the
same harshness.</p>
<p>"The expiation is too great," the young fellow answered. "The
torture is unendurable."</p>
<p>"Charles," said M. Rambert very gravely, "do you forget that
legally, civilly, you are dead?"</p>
<p>"I would a thousand times rather be really dead!" the unhappy
lad exclaimed.</p>
<p>"Alas!" his father murmured, speaking very fast, "I thought
your mind was more unhinged than it really is. I saved your life,
regardless of all risk, because I thought you were insane, and
now I know you are a criminal! Oh, yes, I know things, I know
your life!"</p>
<p>"Father," said Charles Rambert with so stern and determined
an expression that Etienne Rambert felt a moment's fear. "I
want to know first of all how you managed to save my life and
make out that I was dead. Was that just chance, or was it
planned deliberately?"</p>
<p>Confronted with this new firmness of his son's, Etienne
Rambert dropped his peremptory tone; his shoulders drooped
in distress.</p>
<p>"Can one anticipate things like that?" he said. "When we
parted, my heart bled to think that you, my son, must fall into
the hands of justice, and that your feet must tread the path that
led to the scaffold or, at least, to the galleys; I wondered how I<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_143">[143]</a></span>
could save you; then chance, chance, mark you, brought that
poor drowned body in my way: I saw the fortunate coincidence
of a faint resemblance, and resolved to pass it off for you; I got
those woman's clothes which you exchanged for yours, buried
the dead man's clothes and put yours on the corpse. Do you
know, Charles, that I have suffered too? Do you know what
agony and torture I, as a man of honour, have endured? Have
you not heard the story of my appearance at the Assizes and of
my humiliation in court?"</p>
<p>"You did all that!" Charles Rambert murmured. "Strange
chance, indeed!" Then his tone changed and he sobbed. "Oh,
my poor father, what an awful fatality it all is!" Suddenly he
sprang to his feet. "But I committed no crime, papa! I never
killed the Marquise de Langrune! Oh, do believe me! Why, you
have just this minute said that you know I am not mad!"</p>
<p>Etienne Rambert looked at his son with distress.</p>
<p>"Not mad, my poor boy? Yet perhaps you were mad—then?"
Then he stopped abruptly. "Don't let us go over all that again! I
forbid it absolutely." He leaned back on his writing-table, folded
his arms and asked sternly: "Have you come here only to tell me
that?"</p>
<p>The curt question seemed to affect the lad strangely. All his
former audacity dropped from him. Nervously he stammered:</p>
<p>"I can't remain a woman any longer!"</p>
<p>"Why not?" snapped Etienne Rambert.</p>
<p>"I can't."</p>
<p>The two men looked at each other in silence, as if trying to
read one another's thoughts. Then Etienne Rambert seemed to
see the inner meaning of the words his son had just said.</p>
<p>"I see!" he answered slowly. "I understand.... The Royal
Palace Hotel, where Mlle. Jeanne held a trusted post, has just
been the scene of a daring robbery. Obviously, if anyone could
prove that Charles Rambert and the new cashier were one and
the same person——"</p>
<p>But the young fellow understood the insinuation and burst out:</p>
<p>"I did not commit that robbery!"</p>
<p>"You did!" Etienne Rambert insisted: "you did. I read the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_144">[144]</a></span>
newspaper accounts of the robbery, read them with all the
agony that only a father like me with a son like you could feel.
The detectives and the magistrates were at a loss to find the key
to the mystery, but I saw clearly and at once what the solution
of the mystery was. And I knew and understood because I knew
it was—you!"</p>
<p>"I did not commit the robbery," Charles Rambert shouted.
"Do you mean to begin all your horrible insinuations again, as
you did at Beaulieu?" he demanded in almost threatening tones.
"What evil spirit obsesses you? Why will you insist that your unhappy
son is a criminal? I had nothing to do with those robberies
at the hotel; I swear I had not, father!"</p>
<p>M. Rambert shrugged his shoulders and clasped his hands.</p>
<p>"What have I done," he muttered, "to have so heavy a cross
laid on me?" He turned again to his son. "Your defence is childish.
What is the use of mere denials? Words don't mean
anything without proofs to support them." The lad was silent,
seeming to think it useless to attempt to convince a father who
appeared so certain of his guilt, and also crushed by the thought
of all that had happened at the hotel. His father betrayed some
uneasiness at a new thought that had come into his mind. "I told
you not to come to me again except as a last resource, when
punishment was actually overtaking you, or when you had
proved your innocence: why are you here now? Has something
happened that I do not know about? What has happened? What
else have you done? Speak!"</p>
<p>Charles Rambert answered in a toneless voice, as if
hypnotised:</p>
<p>"There has been a detective in the hotel for the last few days.
He called himself Henri Verbier, and was disguised, but I knew
him, for I had seen him too lately, and in circumstances too
deeply impressed upon my mind for me to be able to forget
him, although I only saw him then for a few minutes."</p>
<p>"What do you mean?" said the elder man uneasily.</p>
<p>"I mean that Juve was at the Royal Palace Hotel."</p>
<p>"Juve?" exclaimed Etienne Rambert. "And then—go on!"</p>
<p>"Juve, disguised as Henri Verbier, subjected me to a kind of<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_145">[145]</a></span>
examination, and I don't know what conclusion he came to.
Then, this evening, barely two hours ago, he came up to my
room and had a long talk, and while he was trying to get some
information from me about a matter that I know nothing
about—for I swear, papa, that I had nothing whatever to do with
the robbery—he came up to me and took hold of me as a man
does when he wants to make up to a woman. And I lost my head!
I felt that in another minute all would be up with me—that he
would establish my identity, which he perhaps suspected already—and
I thought of all you had done to save my life by representing
that I was dead, and——"</p>
<p>Charles paused for breath. His father's fists were clenched
and his face contracted.</p>
<p>"Go on!" he said, "go on, but speak lower!"</p>
<p>"As Juve came close," Charles went on, "I dealt him a terrific
blow on the forehead, and he fell like a stone. And I got away!"</p>
<p>"Is he dead?" Etienne Rambert whispered.</p>
<p>"I don't know."</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>For ten minutes Charles Rambert remained alone in the
study, where his father had left him, thinking deeply. Then the
door opened and Etienne Rambert came back carrying a bundle
of clothes.</p>
<p>"There you are," he said to his son: "here are some man's
clothes. Put them on, and go!"</p>
<p>The young man hastily took off his woman's garments and
dressed himself in silence, while his father walked up and down
the room, plunged in deepest thought. Twice he asked: "Are you
quite sure it was Juve?" and twice his son replied "Quite sure."
And once again Etienne Rambert asked, in tones that betrayed his
keen anxiety: "Did you kill him?" and Charles Rambert shrugged
his shoulders and replied: "I told you before, I do not know."</p>
<p>And now Charles Rambert stood upon the threshold of the
house, about to leave his father without a word of farewell or
parting embrace. M. Etienne Rambert stayed him, holding out
a pocket-book, filled full with bank-notes.</p>
<p>"There: take that," he said, "and go!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_146">[146]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XV. The Mad Woman's Plot</span></h2>
<p>When Dr. Biron built his famous private asylum in the very
heart of Passy, intended, according to his prospectus, to
provide a retreat for people suffering from nervous breakdown
or from overwork or over-excitement, and to offer hospital treatment
to the insane, in order to secure a kind of official sanction
for his institution, he took the wise precaution to proclaim from
the housetops that he would enlist the services of ex-medical officers
of the hospitals. The idea was a shrewd and a successful
one, and his establishment throve.</p>
<p>Perret and Sembadel were having breakfast, and also were
grumbling.</p>
<p>"I shouldn't curse the meanness of the management quite so
much if they didn't put us on to all the jobs," said Sembadel.
"Hang it all, man, we are both qualified, and when we undertook
to assist Dr. Biron we did so, I presume, in order to top off
our theoretical training with some practical clinical experience."</p>
<p>"Who's stopping you?" Perret enquired.</p>
<p>"How can we find the time, when besides all our actual work
with the patients, we have to do all this administrative work,
writing to people to say how the patients are, and all that? That
ought to be done by clerks, not by us."</p>
<p>"Isn't one job as good as another?" Perret retorted. "Besides,
we are the only people who know how the patients really are, so
it's common sense that we should have to write to their friends."</p>
<p>"They might let us have a secretary, anyhow," Sembadel
growled.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_147">[147]</a></span></p>
<p>Perret saw that his friend was in a bad temper, so did not try
to carry on the argument.</p>
<p>"Say," he said, "you ought to make a special note of that case
of No. 25, for your thesis. She was in your ward for about six
months, wasn't she?"</p>
<p>"No. 25?" said Sembadel. "Yes, I know: a woman named
Rambert; age about forty; hallucination that people are persecuting
her; anæmic, with alternate crises of excitement and
melancholia, punctuated by fits of passion; treatment: rest,
nourishment, anodynes."</p>
<p>"You evidently remember the case distinctly."</p>
<p>"She interested me; she has marvellous eyes. Well, what
about her?"</p>
<p>"Why, when she was moved into my pavilion the diagnosis
was bad and the prognosis very bad: she was supposed to be incurable.
Just go and see her now: her brain is restored: she's a
new woman." He came to the table and picked up some notepaper.
"I wrote to her husband a day or two ago and told him he
might expect to hear that his wife had recovered, but I imagine
my letter miscarried, for I've had no answer. I have a good mind
to write to him again and ask for permission to send her to the
convalescent home. The mischief of it is that this Etienne
Rambert may want to remove her altogether, and that would
mean one paying patient less, which would put our worthy director
in a bad temper for a month."</p>
<p>He turned to his correspondence, and for some minutes the
silence in the room was only broken by the scratching of pens
on paper. Then an attendant came in, bringing a quantity of letters.
Perret picked them up and began to sort them out.</p>
<p>"None for you," he said to Sembadel. "Not one of those little
mauve envelopes which you look for every day and which decide
what your temper will be. I must look out for storms."</p>
<p>"Shan't even have time to grouse to-day," Sembadel growled
again. "You forget that Swelding pays us an official visit to-day."</p>
<p>"The Danish professor? Is it this morning that he is coming?"</p>
<p>"So it seems."</p>
<p>"Who is the fellow?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_148">[148]</a></span></p>
<p>"Just one of those foreign savants who haven't succeeded in
becoming famous at home and so go abroad to worry other people
under a pretext of investigations. That's why he wants to
come here. Wrote some beastly little pamphlet on the ideontology
of the hyper-imaginative. Never heard of it myself."</p>
<p>The conversation dropped, and presently the two men went
off to their wards to see their patients, and warn the attendants
to have everything in apple-pie order for the official inspection.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Meantime, in the great drawing-room, elaborate courtesies
were being exchanged between Dr. Biron and Professor
Swelding.</p>
<p>Dr. Biron was a man of about forty, with a high-coloured face
and an active, vigorous frame. He gesticulated freely and spoke
in an unctuous, fawning tone.</p>
<p>"I am delighted at the great compliment you pay me by coming
here, sir," he said. "When I started this institution five years
ago I certainly did not dare to hope that it would so soon win
sufficient reputation to entitle it to the honour of inspection by
men so eminent in the scientific world as yourself."</p>
<p>The professor listened with a courteous smile but evinced no
hurry in replying.</p>
<p>Professor Swelding was certainly a remarkable figure. He
might have been sixty, but he bore very lightly the weight of the
years that laid their snows upon his thick and curly but startlingly
white hair. It was this hair that attracted attention first; it was of
extraordinary thickness and was joined on to a heavy moustache
and a long and massive beard. He was like a man who might have
taken a vow never to cut his hair. It covered his ears and grew low
upon his forehead, so that hardly a vestige of the face could be
seen, while, further, all the expression of the eyes was concealed
behind large blue spectacles. The professor was enveloped in a
heavy cloak, in spite of the bright sunshine; evidently he was one
of those men from the cold North who do not know what real
warmth is and have no idea of what it means to be too thickly
clothed. He spoke French correctly, but with a slight accent and
a slow enunciation that betrayed a foreign origin.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_149">[149]</a></span></p>
<p>"I was really anxious, sir, to observe for myself the measures
you have taken which have set your institution in the forefront
of establishments of the kind," he replied. "I have read with the
very greatest interest your various communications to the transactions
of learned societies. It is a great advantage for a practitioner
like myself to be able to profit by the experience of a
savant of your high standing."</p>
<p>A few further compliments were exchanged and then Dr.
Biron suggested a visit to the various wards, and led his guest
out into the grounds of the institution.</p>
<p>If Dr. Biron did not possess that theoretical knowledge of insanity
which has made French alienists famous throughout the
world, he was certainly a first-rate organiser. His sanatorium was
a model one. It was situated in one of the wealthiest, quietest
and airiest quarters of Paris, and stood in a vast enclosure behind
high walls; within this enclosure a number of small pavilions
were built, all attractive in design, and communicating by
broad flights of steps with a beautiful garden studded with trees
and shrubs, but further subdivided into a series of little gardens
separated from one another by white latticed palings.</p>
<p>"You see, Professor, I rely entirely on the isolation principle.
A single block would have involved a deleterious collocation of
various types of insanity, so I built this series of small pavilions,
where my patients can be segregated according to their type of
alienation. The system has great therapeutic advantages, and I
am sure it is the explanation of my high percentage of cures."</p>
<p>Professor Swelding nodded approval.</p>
<p>"We apply the system of segregation in Denmark," he said, "but
we have never carried it so far as to divide the general grounds. I
see that each of your pavilions has its own private garden."</p>
<p>"I regard that as indispensable," Dr. Biron declared. He led
his visitor to one of the little gardens, where a man of about fifty
was walking about between two attendants. "This man is a
megalomaniac," he said: "he believes that he is the Almighty."</p>
<p>"What is your treatment here?" Professor Swelding enquired.
"I am aware that the books prescribe isolation, but that is not
sufficient by itself."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_150">[150]</a></span></p>
<p>"I nurse the brain by nursing the body," Dr. Biron replied. "I
build up my patient's system by careful attention to hygiene,
diet, and rest, and I pretend to ignore his mental alienation.
There is always a spark of sound sense in a diseased brain. This
man imagines he is the Almighty, but when he is hungry he has
to ask for something to eat, and then we pretend to wonder why
he has any need to eat if he is the Almighty; he has to concoct
some explanation, and very gradually his reasoning power is restored.
A man ceases to be insane the moment he begins to
comprehend that he is insane."</p>
<p>The Professor followed the doctor, casting curious eyes at the
various patients who were walking in their gardens.</p>
<p>"Have you many cures?"</p>
<p>"That is a difficult question to answer," said Dr. Biron. "The statistics
are so very different in the different categories of insanity."</p>
<p>"Of course," said Professor Swelding; "but take some particular
type of dementia, say, hallucination of persecution. What
percentage of cures can you show there?"</p>
<p>"Twenty per cent absolute recoveries, and forty per cent definite
improvements," the doctor replied promptly, and as the
Professor evinced unmistakable astonishment at so high a percentage,
Dr. Biron took him familiarly by the arm and drew him
along. "I will show you a patient who actually is to be sent home
in a day or two. I believe that she is completely cured, or on the
very point of being completely cured."</p>
<p>A woman of about forty was sitting in one of the gardens by
the side of an attendant, quietly sewing. Dr. Biron paused to
draw his visitor's particular attention to her.</p>
<p>"That lady belongs to one of the best of our great merchant
families. She is Mme. Alice Rambert, wife of Etienne Rambert,
the rubber merchant. She has been under my care for nearly ten
months. When she came here she was in the last stage of debility
and anæmia and suffered from the most characteristic hallucination
of all: she thought that assassins were all round her. I
have built up her physical system, and now I have cured her
mind. At the present moment that lady is not mad at all, in the
proper sense of the term."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_151">[151]</a></span></p>
<p>"She never shows any symptoms of reverting to her morbid
condition?" Professor Swelding enquired with interest.</p>
<p>"Never."</p>
<p>"And would not, even if violently upset?"</p>
<p>"I do not think so."</p>
<p>"May I talk to her?"</p>
<p>"Certainly," and Dr. Biron led the visitor towards the seat on
which the patient was sitting. "Madame Rambert," he said, "may
I present Professor Swelding to you? He has heard that you are
here and would like to pay his respects."</p>
<p>Mme. Rambert put down her needlework and rose and
looked at the Danish professor.</p>
<p>"I am delighted to make the gentleman's acquaintance," she
said, "but I should like to know how he was aware of my existence,
my dear doctor."</p>
<p>"I regret that I cannot claim to know you, madame," said
Professor Swelding, replying for Dr. Biron, "but I know that in
addressing you I shall be speaking to the inmate of this institution
who will testify most warmly to the scientific skill and the
devotion of Dr. Biron."</p>
<p>"At all events," Mme. Rambert replied coldly, "he carries his
kindness to the extent of wishing his patients never to be dull,
since he brings unexpected visitors to see them."</p>
<p>The phrase was an implicit reproach of Dr. Biron's too ready
inclination to exhibit his patients as so many rare and curious
wild animals, and it stung him all the more because he was convinced
that Mme. Rambert was perfectly sane. He pretended
not to hear what she said, giving some order to the attendant,
Berthe, who was standing respectfully by.</p>
<p>"I understand, madame," Professor Swelding replied gently.
"You object to my visit as an intrusion?"</p>
<p>Mme. Rambert had picked up her work and already was
sewing again, but suddenly she sprang up, so abruptly that the
professor recoiled, and exclaimed sharply:</p>
<p>"Who called me? Who called me? Who——"</p>
<p>The Professor was attempting to speak when the patient interrupted
him.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_152">[152]</a></span></p>
<p>"Oh!" she cried, "Alice! Alice! His voice—his voice! Go away!
You frighten me! Who spoke? Go away! Oh, help! help!" and she
fled screaming towards the far end of the garden, with the attendant
and Dr. Biron running after her. With all the cleverness
of the insane she managed to elude them, and continued to
scream. "Oh, I recognised him! Do go away, I implore you! Go!
Murder! Murder!"</p>
<p>The attendant tried to reassure the doctor.</p>
<p>"Don't be frightened, sir. She is not dangerous. I expect the
visit from that gentleman has upset her."</p>
<p>The poor demented creature had taken refuge behind a
clump of shrubs, and was standing there with eyes dilated with
anguish fixed on the Professor and hand pointing to him, trembling
in every limb.</p>
<p>"Fantômas!" she cried: "Fantômas! There—I know him! Oh,
help!"</p>
<p>The scene was horribly distressing, and Dr. Biron put an end
to it by ordering the attendant to take Mme. Rambert to her
room and induce her to rest, and to send at once for M. Perret.
Then he turned to Professor Swelding.</p>
<p>"I am greatly distressed by this incident, Professor. It proves
that the cure of this poor creature is by no means so assured as
I had believed. But there are other cases which will not shake
your faith in my judgment like this, I hope. Shall we go on?"</p>
<p>Professor Swelding tried to comfort the doctor.</p>
<p>"The brain is a pathetically frail thing," he said. "You could
not have a more striking case to prove it: that poor lady, whom
you believed to be cured, suddenly having a typical crisis of her
form of insanity provoked by—what? Neither you nor I look
particularly like assassins, do we?" And he followed Dr. Biron,
who was much discomfited, to be shown other matters of
interest.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>"Better now, madame? Are you going to be good?"</p>
<p>Mme. Rambert was reclining on a sofa in her room, watching
her attendant, Berthe, moving about and tidying up the slight<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_153">[153]</a></span>
disorder caused by her recent ministrations. The patient made a
little gesture of despair.</p>
<p>"Poor Berthe!" she said. "If you only knew how unhappy I am,
and how sorry for having given way to that panic just now!"</p>
<p>"Oh, that was nothing," said the attendant. "The doctor won't
attach any importance to that."</p>
<p>"Yes, he will," said the patient with a weary smile. "I think he
will attach importance to it, and in any case it will delay my discharge
from this place."</p>
<p>"Not a bit of it, madame. Why, you know they have written to
your home to say you are cured?"</p>
<p>Mme. Rambert did not reply for a minute or two. Then she
said:</p>
<p>"Tell me, Berthe, what do you understand by the word
'cured'?"</p>
<p>The attendant was rather nonplussed.</p>
<p>"Why, it means that you are better: that you are quite well."</p>
<p>Her patient smiled bitterly.</p>
<p>"It is true that my health is better now, and that my stay here
has done me good. But that is not what I was talking about.
What is your opinion about my madness?"</p>
<p>"You mustn't think about that," the attendant remonstrated.
"You are no more mad than I am."</p>
<p>"Oh, I know the worst symptom of madness is to declare you
are not mad," Mme. Rambert answered sadly; "so I will be careful
not to say it, Berthe. But, apart from this last panic, the reason
for which I cannot tell you, have you ever known me do, or
heard me say, anything that was utterly devoid of reason, in all
the time that I have been in your charge?"</p>
<p>Struck by the remark, the attendant, in spite of herself, was
obliged to confess:</p>
<p>"No, I never have—that is——"</p>
<p>"That is," Mme. Rambert finished for her, "I have sometimes
protested to you that I was the victim of an abominable persecution,
and that there was a tragic mystery in my life: in short,
that if I was shut up here, it was because someone wanted me<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_154">[154]</a></span>
to be shut up. Come now, Berthe, has it never occurred to you
that perhaps I was telling the truth?"</p>
<p>The attendant had been shaken for a minute by the calm self-possession
of her patient; now she resumed her professional
manner.</p>
<p>"Don't worry any more, Mme. Rambert, for you know as well
as I do that Dr. Biron acknowledges that you are cured now. You
are going to leave the place and resume your ordinary life."</p>
<p>"Ah, Berthe," said Mme. Rambert, twisting and untwisting
her hands, "if you only knew! Why, if I leave this sanatorium, or
rather if the doctor sends me back to my family, I shall certainly
be put in some other sanatorium before two days are past! No,
it isn't merely an idea that I have got into my head," she went on
as the attendant protested. "Listen: during the whole ten
months that I have been here, I have never once protested that
I was not insane. I was quite glad to be in this place! For I felt
safe here. But now I am not sure of that. I must go, but I must
not go merely to return to my husband! I must be free, free to
go to those who will help me to escape from the horrible trap in
which I have spent the last few years of my life!"</p>
<p>Mme. Rambert's earnest tone convinced the attendant in
spite of her own instinct.</p>
<p>"Yes?" she said enquiringly.</p>
<p>"I suppose you know that I am rich, Berthe?" Mme. Rambert
went on. "I have always been generous to you, and higher fees
are paid for me here than are paid for any other patient. Would
you like to make sure of your future for ever, and quite easily? I
have heard you talk about getting married. Shall I give you a
dot? You might lose your situation here, but if you trust me I will
make it up to you a hundredfold, if you will help me to escape
from this place! And it cannot be too soon! I have not a minute
to lose!"</p>
<p>Berthe tried to get away from her patient, but Mme. Rambert
held her back, almost by force.</p>
<p>"Tell me your price," she said. "How much do you want? A
thousand pounds? Two thousand pounds?" and as the attendant,
bewildered by the mere suggestion of such fabulous sums, was<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_155">[155]</a></span>
silent, Mme. Rambert slipped a diamond ring off her finger and
held it out to the young woman. "Take that as proof of my sincerity,"
she said. "If anybody asks me about it I will say that I
have lost it. And from now, Berthe, begin to prepare a way for
me to escape! The very night that I am free I swear you shall be
a rich woman!"</p>
<p>Berthe got up, swaying, hardly knowing if she was awake or
dreaming.</p>
<p>"A rich woman!" she murmured. "A rich woman!" and over
the girl's face there suddenly crept a horrible expression of cupidity
and desire.</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_156">[156]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XVI. Among the Market Porters</span></h2>
<p>"Boulevard Rochechouart," said Berthe, the young asylum
nurse, to the conductor as she sprang into the tram just as
it was starting.</p>
<p>It was a September afternoon, one of the last fine days of the
now fast-dying summer, and the girl had just got her fortnightly
leave for forty-eight hours. She had gone off duty at noon, and
now had until noon on the next day but one to resume her own
personality and shake off the anxieties that beset all those who
are charged with the constant care of the insane, the most distressing
kind of patients that exists. As a general rule Berthe
spent her fortnightly holidays with her old grand-parents in
their cottage outside Paris, but on this occasion she had elected
to remain in the city, influenced thereto by the long conversation
she had had with the patient confided to her particular care,
No. 25, Mme. Rambert. Since that first talk with her, on the day
of Professor Swelding's visit to the asylum, she had had others,
and Berthe had now elaborated a plan to enable the supposed
lunatic to escape, and had decided to spend her short holiday in
bringing the plan to a point.</p>
<p>At the boulevard Rochechouart Berthe got out of the tram,
looked around to get her bearings in the somewhat unfamiliar
neighbourhood, and then turned into the rue Clignancourt and
stood on the left-hand side of the street, looking at the shops.
The third one was a wine shop, only the first of many in the
street.</p>
<p>Berthe pushed the door of this establishment a little way
open and looked at the rather rowdy company gathered round<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_157">[157]</a></span>
the zinc counter, all with flushed faces and all talking loudly. She
did not venture inside, but in a clear voice asked, "Is M.
Geoffroy here?" No definite answer was forthcoming, but the
men turned round, hearing her enquiry, and seeing her pretty
figure began to nudge one another and jest and laugh coarsely.
"Come in, missy," said one of them, but already Berthe had
quickly closed the door and lightly gone on her way.</p>
<p>A few yards further on there was another bar, and into this,
also, Berthe peeped and once more asked, "Is M. Geoffroy
here?" adding by way of further explanation, "Hogshead
Geoffroy, I mean." This time a roar of laughter followed, and
the girl fled, flushed with indignation.</p>
<p>Yet she did not desist from her strange search, and at last, at
the sixth shop, her question was answered by a deep bass voice
from the far end of a smoke-clouded den. "Hogshead Geoffroy?
Here!" and heaving a sigh of relief Berthe went inside the shop.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>When you want to see M. "Hogshead" Geoffroy, your procedure
is simplicity itself. As he has no known address, all you have
to do is to start at the bottom of the rue Clignancourt on the left-hand
side, look into every wineshop, and ask, in tones loud
enough to be heard above the clatter of conversation, whether
Hogshead Geoffroy is there, and it will be mighty bad luck if, at
one or other of the bars, you do not hear the answer, "Hogshead
Geoffroy? Here," followed immediately by that gentleman's
order to the <i>patronne</i>: "Half a pint, please: the gentleman will
pay!" It is a safe order; the <i>patronne</i> knows from past experience
that she can serve the half-pint without anxiety: Hogshead
Geoffroy rapidly drains it, and then holds out a huge and hairy
hand to the visitor and enquires, "Well, what is it?"</p>
<p>If, as often happens, the Hogshead finds himself confronted
by a stranger, he feels no surprise; he knows his own popularity,
and is a modest soul, so he calls his visitor by his Christian name
at once, taps him amicably on the shoulder, and calls him "old
boy," and invites him to stand a drink. The Hogshead is an artist
in his line; he hires himself out to public halls to announce in his
powerful voice, reinforced by a trumpet, the various items on<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_158">[158]</a></span>
the programme or the results of performances achieved. He
also harangues the crowd on behalf of showmen, or hurls threats
at too excited demonstrators at public demonstrations. Between
whiles he rolls hogsheads down into cellars, or bottles wine, and
even drinks it when he is among friends who have money to pay
withal.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>At sight of Berthe, Hogshead Geoffroy so far departed from
custom as not to give an order to the <i>patronne</i> at the bar; instead,
he rose and went towards the girl and unceremoniously
embraced her.</p>
<p>"Ah-ha, little sister, there you are! Why, I was just that moment
thinking of you!" He drew her to the back of the shop, towards
a bunch of sturdy, square-shouldered fellows drinking
there, to whom he introduced her. "Now then, mates, try to behave
yourselves; I'm bringing a charming young lady to see you,
my sister Berthe, little Bob—Bobinette, as we called her when
we lived with the old folks." The girl blushed, a little uneasy at
finding herself in such a mixed company, but Hogshead
Geoffroy put every one at ease; he put his great hand under
Berthe's chin and tilted her head back. "Don't you think she is
pretty, this little sister of mine? She's the very spit of her
brother!" There was a general roar of laughter. The contrast between
the two figures was so great that it seemed impossible
there could be any relationship between them: the graceful,
slender, tiny <i>Parisienne</i> looking tinier still beside the huge colossus
of a man six feet high, with the chest of a bull and the shoulders
of an athlete. "We don't seem to be built on quite the same
lines," M. Geoffroy admitted, "but all the same there is a family
likeness!"</p>
<p>The men made room for the girl, and after she had yielded to
the general insistence and accepted a glass of white wine,
Geoffroy bent forward and spoke in a lower tone.</p>
<p>"Well, what do you want with me?"</p>
<p>"I want to talk to you about something which will interest you,
I'm sure," Berthe answered.</p>
<p>"Anything to be got out of it?" was the giant's next enquiry.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_159">[159]</a></span></p>
<p>Berthe smiled.</p>
<p>"I expect so, or I wouldn't have troubled you."</p>
<p>"Whenever there's any money to be picked up the Hogshead's
always on," he replied: "especially just now when things aren't
any too bright, though I may tell you I think there's going to be
an alteration in that respect."</p>
<p>"Have you got a situation?" Berthe asked in some surprise.</p>
<p>Hogshead Geoffroy laid a finger on his lip.</p>
<p>"It's still a secret," he said, "but there's no harm in talking it
over, for everybody here knows all about it," and at interminable
length, and with many a pause for libations, he explained that he
was a candidate for an appointment as Market Porter. He had
been cramming for a fortnight past, in order to emerge triumphantly
from the examination to which candidates were always
subjected, and that very morning he had sat in the Hôtel
de Ville wrestling with nothing less than a problem in arithmetic.
In proof, he produced from his pocket a crumpled,
greasy and wine-stained sheet of paper scrawled all over with
childish writing and figures, and showed it to his sister, immensely
proud of the effect he was producing on her. "A problem,"
he repeated. "See here: two taps fill a tank at the rate of
twenty litres a minute, and a third tap empties it at the rate of
fifteen hundred litres an hour. How long will it take for the tank
to get full?"</p>
<p>A friend of Geoffroy's broke in: it was Mealy Benoît, his most
formidable competitor for the appointment.</p>
<p>"And how long will it take for you to get full?" he asked with
a great laugh.</p>
<p>Hogshead Geoffroy banged his fist on the table.</p>
<p>"This is a serious conversation," he said, and turned again to
his sister, who wanted to know if he had succeeded in finding
the answer to the problem. "Maybe," he replied. "I worked by
rule of thumb, for, as you know, arithmetic and all those devil's
funniments aren't in my line. To sit for an hour, writing at a table
in the great hall of the Hôtel de Ville—not much! It made me
sweat more than carrying four hundredweight!"</p>
<p>But the company was preparing to make a move. Time was<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_160">[160]</a></span>
getting on, and at six o'clock the second part of the examination,
the physical test, was to be held in the Fish Market. Mealy
Benoît had paid his score already, and Hogshead Geoffroy's deferent
escort of friends was getting restless. Berthe won fresh
favour in her brother's eyes by paying for their refreshments
with a ten franc piece and leaving the change to be placed to his
credit, and then with him she left the wineshop.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>The annual competition for an appointment as Market Porter
is held at the end of September. It is a great event. There are
generally many candidates, but only two or three, and sometimes
less, of the best are picked. The posts are few and good,
for the number of porters is limited. The examination is in two
parts: one purely intellectual, consisting of some simple
problem and a little dictation, the other physical, in which the
candidates have to carry a sack of meal weighing three hundredweight
a distance of two hundred yards in the shortest time.</p>
<p>At six o'clock punctually the market women were all in their
places along the pavement by their respective stalls. The hall
was decorated with flags; the salesmen and regular shopmen
were provided with chairs, and their assistants were behind
them, with the sweepers and criers; at the back stood three or
four rows of the general public, all eager to witness the impressive
display.</p>
<p>The two-hundred-yard course was carefully cleared, every
obstacle having been scrupulously swept off the asphalte, especially
pieces of orange-peel, lettuce leaves and bits of rotten vegetable
matter, which might have caused a competitor to slip
when trying to break the record for carrying the sack. A high official
of the Hôtel de Ville and three of the senior Market
Porters formed the jury, and there were also two officials of the
Cyclists' Union, expert in the use of stop watches, armed with
tested chronometers and deputed to take the exact time of each
performance.</p>
<p>The crowd of onlookers was as odd, and eclectic, and keen, as
can possibly be imagined. Berthe, who knew that false modesty
is quite out of place in popular gatherings, mingled freely in the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_161">[161]</a></span>
general conversation. Among other picturesque types she had
noticed one particularly extraordinary individual who, although
he was in the last row of all, overtopped the rest by quite half of
his body, being perched on an antiquated tricycle, which provoked
the hilarity of the mob.</p>
<p>"What ho, Bouzille!" somebody called out, for the man was a
well-known and popular figure, and everybody knew his name.
"Is that Methuselah's tricycle that you have pinched?" and to
some of the sallies the fellow replied with a smile that was almost
lost in his matted beard, and to others with a jest uttered
in the purest dialect of Auvergne.</p>
<p>Someone spoke softly in Berthe's ear and she turned and saw
a sturdy fellow of about twenty-five, wearing a blue blouse, a red
handkerchief round his neck, and a drover's cap; he was a well-built,
powerful man, and in spite of his humble dress, had an intelligent
face and an almost distinguished manner. Berthe
responded amiably, and a few commonplace remarks were
exchanged between the two.</p>
<p>"In case you care to know, my name's Julot," said the man.</p>
<p>And Berthe replied frankly, but without otherwise compromising
herself.</p>
<p>"And I am Bob, or Bobinette, whichever you like. I am
Hogshead Geoffroy's sister," she added with a little touch of pride.</p>
<p>A murmur ran round the crowd. Mealy Benoît was going
through his trial. The great fellow came along with rapid, rhythmical
step, with supple limbs and chest hunched forward.
Surely balanced on his broad shoulders and the nape of his neck
was an enormous sack of meal, accurately weighed to scale three
hundredweight. Without the least hesitation or slackening of
pace, he covered the two hundred yards, reaching the goal perfectly
fresh and fit; he stood for a moment or two in front of the
judges, displaying the mighty muscles of his naked chest, over
which the perspiration was running, and evincing genuine delight
in not freeing himself from his heavy burden at the earliest
possible moment. The applause was enthusiastic and immediate,
but silence quickly fell again and all eyes turned towards the
starting-post. It was Hogshead Geoffroy's turn.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_162">[162]</a></span></p>
<p>The giant was really a splendid sight. Instead of walking as his
rival had done, he began to step like a gymnast, and the crowd
yelled their delight. It seemed that he must beat his rival's time
easily, but all at once the great sack on his shoulders was seen to
shake, and Geoffroy almost stopped, uttering a heavy groan before
he got going again. The crowd looked on in surprise: where
he had just set his feet there was a wet mark upon the asphalte:
Geoffroy had slipped on a piece of orange-peel. But he managed
to restore the equilibrium of the sack, and, taught caution
by the risk he had just run, he finished the course with measured
steps.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Two hours later the result of the competition was announced.
Hogshead Geoffroy and Mealy Benoît were bracketed equal,
having taken exactly the same time to cover the course; upon
the result of the written examination would depend the final
issue, and the matter was all the more important because this
year there was but one vacancy for a Market Porter.</p>
<p>Berthe, or Bobinette, was vehemently discussing with her
neighbours the mishap that had befallen Geoffroy during his
trial. A man dressed in a shabby black overcoat buttoned up to
the chin, and wearing a kind of jockey cap on his greasy hair, was
watching her intently, seeming to agree with all she said while
really interested in something else. Berthe, who was very intent
upon the matter in hand, did not notice this individual's manner;
it was Julot, her faithful squire for the last two hours, who got
her away.</p>
<p>"Come," he said, taking her by the sleeve, "you know your
brother is waiting for you," and as she yielded to his insistence
he whispered in her ear, "That chap's a dirty-looking rascal: I
don't think much of him!"</p>
<p>"He certainly is uncommonly ugly," the girl admitted, and
then like the trained nurse that she was, she added, "and did you
notice his complexion? The man must be ill: he is absolutely
green!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_163">[163]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XVII. At the Saint-Anthony's Pig</span></h2>
<p>"Pay for a drink, and I'll listen to you," said Hogshead
Geoffroy to his sister.</p>
<p>After numerous visits to the many bars and drinking saloons
that surround the markets, they had finally gone for a late supper
into the Saint-Anthony's Pig, the most popular tavern in the
neighbourhood, Geoffroy having reconciled himself to waiting
for the result of the examination, which would not be announced
until the following day.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>A new and original attraction had been stationed outside the
Saint-Anthony's Pig for the last few days. After the formal enquiries
succeeding his discovery of the drowned body in the
river, Bouzille had come to Paris to see the Eiffel Tower. He had
met with but a week's delay in his itinerary, having been locked
up for that time at Orleans for some trifling misdemeanour.</p>
<p>On entering the capital, Bouzille's extraordinary equipage had
caused quite a sensation, and as the worthy fellow, with utter
disregard of the heavy traffic in the city, had careered about in
it through the most crowded streets, he had very soon been run
in and taken to the nearest lock-up. His train had been confiscated
for forty-eight hours, but as there was nothing really to be
objected against the tramp, he had merely been requested to
make himself scarce, and not to do it again.</p>
<p>Bouzille did not quite know what to make of it all. But while
he was towing his two carriages behind his tricycle towards the
Champ-de-Mars, from which point he would at last be able to
contemplate the Eiffel Tower, he had fallen in with the editor of<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_164">[164]</a></span>
the <i>Auto</i>, to whom, in exchange for a bottle of wine at the next
café, he had ingenuously confided his story. A sensational article
about the globe-trotting tramp appeared in the next number of
that famous sporting journal, and Bouzille woke to find himself
famous. The next thing that happened was that François
Bonbonne, the proprietor of the Saint-Anthony's Pig, shrewdly
foreseeing that this original character with his remarkable
equipage would furnish a singular attraction, engaged him to
station himself outside the establishment from eleven to three
every night, in return for his board and lodging and a salary of
five francs a day.</p>
<p>It need not be said that Bouzille had closed with the offer. But
getting tired of cooling his heels on the doorstep, he had gradually
taken to leaving his train on the pavement and himself going
down into the basement hall, where he generously returned his
five francs every night to the proprietor, in exchange for potations
to that amount.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>In the basement of the Saint-Anthony's Pig the atmosphere
was steadily getting cloudier, and the noise louder. The time was
about a quarter to two. The "swells," and the young men about
town who went to have a bowl of onion soup at the popular café
because that was the latest correct thing to do, had withdrawn.
The few pale and shabby dancers had given their show, and in
another ten minutes, when the wealthy customers had departed,
the supper room would resume its natural appearance
and everybody would be at home. François Bonbonne had just
escorted the last toffs up the narrow corkscrew staircase that led
from the basement to the ground-floor, and now he stood, his
stout person entirely filling the only exit, unctuously suggesting
that perhaps somebody would like to give an order for a hot
wine salad.</p>
<p>Berthe was sitting in a corner beside her brother, whom the
warmth of the room and his numerous potations had rendered
drowsy, and thinking it an opportune moment to tell him of her
scheme, before he became talkative or quarrelsome, she began
to explain.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_165">[165]</a></span></p>
<p>"There's nothing much to do, but I want a strong man like
you."</p>
<p>"Any barrels to roll anywhere?" he enquired in a thick voice.</p>
<p>Berthe shook her head, her glance meanwhile resting mechanically
on a small young man with a budding beard and a
pale face, who had just taken a seat opposite her and was timidly
ordering a portion of sauerkraut.</p>
<p>"I want some bars removed from a window; they are iron bars
set in stone, but the stone is worn and the bars are very rusty,
and anybody with a little strength could wrench them out."</p>
<p>"And that's all?" Geoffroy enquired suspiciously.</p>
<p>"Yes, that's all."</p>
<p>"Then I shall be very glad to help you: I suppose it will be
worth something, won't it?" He broke off short, noticing that a
man sitting close by seemed to be listening attentively to the
conversation. Berthe followed his eyes, and then turned with a
smile to her brother.</p>
<p>"That's all right; don't mind; I know that man," and in proof of
the statement she held out a friendly hand to the individual who
seemed to be spying upon them. "Good evening again, M. Julot:
how are you, since I saw you just now? I did not notice you were
here."</p>
<p>Julot shook hands with her and without evincing any further
interest in her, went on with the conversation he was having
with his own companion, a clean-shaven fellow.</p>
<p>"Go on, Billy Tom," he said in low tones. "Tell me what has
happened."</p>
<p>"Well, there has been the devil to pay at the Royal Palace,
owing to that——accident, you know; of course I was not mixed
up in it in any way: I'm only interpreter, and I stick to my own
job. But three weeks after the affair, Muller was suddenly kicked
out, owing to the door having been opened for the chap who
worked the robbery."</p>
<p>"Muller, Muller?" said Julot, seeming to be searching his
memory. "Who is Muller?"</p>
<p>"Why, the watchman on the second floor."</p>
<p>"Oh, ah, yes; and who turned him out?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_166">[166]</a></span></p>
<p>"I think his name is Juve."</p>
<p>"Oh—ho!" Julot muttered to himself. "I thought as much!"</p>
<p>There was a noise at the entrance of the hall, and down the
corkscrew staircase came two people who, judging by the greeting
they received, were very popular: Ernestine, a well-known
figure, and Mealy Benoît, who was very drunk.</p>
<p>Benoît lurched from one table to another, leaning on every
head and pair of shoulders that came his way, and reached an
empty seat on a lounge into which he crushed, half squashing
the pale young man with the budding beard. The lad made no
protest, seeming to be afraid of his neighbour's bulk, but merely
wriggled sideways and tried to give the new-comer all the room
he wanted. Benoît did not seem even to notice the humble little
fellow, but Ernestine took pity on him and assured him that
she would look after him.</p>
<p>"All right, sonny," she said, "Mealy won't squash you; and if he
tries any of his games on you, Ernestine will look after you." She
took his head between her two hands and kissed his forehead affectionately,
ignoring Mealy Benoît's angry protests. "He's a dear
little chap: I like him," she said to the company at large. "What's
your name, deary?"</p>
<p>The boy blushed to the tips of his ears.</p>
<p>"Paul," he murmured.</p>
<p>But François Bonbonne the proprietor, with his usual keen
eye to business, arrived just then and set down before Mealy
Benoît the famous hot wine salad of which he had spoken before.
Behind Bonbonne came Bouzille, who had left his turn-out
on the pavement and come down into the supper room to eat
and drink his five francs, and more if credit could be got.</p>
<p>Benoît caught sight of Hogshead Geoffroy and immediately
offered to clink glasses with him; he pushed a glass towards him,
inviting him to dip it with the rest into the steaming bowl; but
Geoffroy was warming up under the influence of alcohol, and
broke into a sudden flame of wrath at sight of Mealy Benoît. If
Benoît should be given the first place, it would be a rank injustice,
he reflected, for he, Geoffroy, was most certainly the
stronger man. And besides, the sturdy Hogshead was beginning<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_167">[167]</a></span>
to wonder whether his rival might not have devised an odious
plot against him and put the famous piece of orange-peel upon
the track, but for which Geoffroy would have won hands down.
So Geoffroy, very drunk, offered Benoît, who was no whit more
sober, the gross affront of refusing to clink glasses with him!</p>
<p>"Why, it's you!" exclaimed Bouzille, in ringing tones of such
glad surprise that everybody turned round to see whom he was
addressing. Julot and Berthe looked with the rest.</p>
<p>"Why, it's the green man of just now," said the asylum nurse
to her companion, and he assented, moodily enough.</p>
<p>"Yes, it's him right enough."</p>
<p>Bouzille took no notice of the attention he had provoked, and
did not seem to notice that the green man appeared to be anything
but pleased at having been recognised.</p>
<p>"I've seen you before, I know," he went on; "where have I met
you?"</p>
<p>The green man did not answer; he affected to be engrossed in
a most serious conversation with the friend he had brought with
him into the supper room, a shabby individual who carried a
guitar. But Bouzille was not to be put off, and suddenly he exclaimed,
with perfect indifference to what his neighbours might
think:</p>
<p>"I know: you are the tramp who was arrested with me down
there in Lot! The day of that murder—you know—the murder
of the Marquise de Langrune!"</p>
<p>Bouzille in his excitement had caught the green man by the
sleeve, but the green man impatiently shook him off, growling
angrily.</p>
<p>"Well, and what about it?"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>For some minutes now Hogshead Geoffroy and Mealy Benoît
had been exchanging threatening glances. Geoffroy had given
voice to his suspicions, and kind friends had not failed to report
his words to Benoît. Inflamed with drink as they were, the two
men were bound to come to blows before long, and a dull
murmur ran through the room heralding the approaching altercation.
Berthe, anxious on her brother's behalf, and a little<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_168">[168]</a></span>
frightened on her own, did all she could to induce Geoffroy to
come away, but even though she promised to pay for any number
of drinks elsewhere, he refused to budge from the bench
where he was sitting hunched up in a corner.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>When at length he got rid of Bouzille and his exasperating
garrulity, the green man resumed his conversation with his
friend with the guitar.</p>
<p>"It's rather odd that he hasn't a trace of accent," the latter remarked.</p>
<p>"Oh, it's nothing for a fellow like Gurn to speak French like a
Frenchman," said the green man in a low tone; then he stopped
nervously. Ernestine was walking about among the company,
chatting to one and another and getting drinks, and he fancied
that she was listening to what he said.</p>
<p>But another duologue rose audible in another part of the
room.</p>
<p>"If the gentleman would like to show his strength there's
someone ready to take him on."</p>
<p>Hogshead Geoffroy had thrown down his glove!</p>
<p>Silence fell upon the room. It was Mealy Benoît's turn to answer.
At that precise moment, however, Benoît was draining the
salad bowl. He slowly swallowed the last of the red liquid—one
can't do two things at once—laid the bowl down, empty, on the
table, and in thundering, dignified tones demanded another,
wiped his lips on the back of his sleeve, and turned his huge
head towards the corner where Geoffroy was hunched up, saying,
"Will the gentleman kindly repeat his last remark?"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Ernestine moved furtively to Julot's side, and affecting to be
interested only in the argument going on between Geoffroy and
Benoît, said without looking at him:</p>
<p>"The pale man, with the greenish complexion, said to the man
with the guitar, 'It's he, all right, because of the burn in the palm
of his hand.'"</p>
<p>Julot choked back an oath, and instinctively clenched his fist,
but Ernestine already had moved on and was huskily chaffing<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_169">[169]</a></span>
the young man with the budding beard. Julot sat with sombre
face and angry eyes, only replying in curt monosyllables to the
occasional remarks of his next neighbour, Billy Tom. Marie, the
waitress, was passing near him and he signed to her to stop.</p>
<p>"Say, Marie," he said, nodding towards the window that was
behind him, "what does that window open on to?"</p>
<p>The girl thought for a moment.</p>
<p>"On to the cellar," she said; "this hall is in the basement."</p>
<p>"And the cellar," Julot went on; "how do you get out of that?"</p>
<p>"You can't," the servant answered; "there's no door; you have
to come through here."</p>
<p>Momentarily becoming more uneasy, Julot scrutinised the
long tunnel of a room at the extreme end of which he was sitting;
there was only one means of egress, up the narrow
corkscrew staircase leading to the ground-floor, and at the very
foot of that staircase was the table occupied by the green man
and the man with the guitar.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>A plate aimed by Hogshead Geoffroy at Mealy Benoît
crashed against the opposite wall. Everyone jumped to his feet,
the women screaming, the men swearing. The two market
porters stood confronting one another, Hogshead Geoffroy
brandishing a chair, Benoît trying to wrench the marble top
from a table to serve as a weapon. The mêlée became general,
plates smashing on the floor, and dinner things flying towards
the ceiling.</p>
<p>Suddenly a shot rang out, but quickly though it had been
fired, the green man and the man with the guitar had seen who
fired it. For the last few minutes, indeed, these two mysterious
individuals had never taken their eyes off Julot.</p>
<p>Julot, whom Berthe had supposed from his appearance to be
an honest cattle-drover, was undoubtedly a wonderful shot.
Having observed that the room was lighted by a single chandelier
composed of three electric lamps, and that the current was
supplied by only two wires running along the cornice, Julot had
taken aim at the wires and cut them clean in two with a single
shot!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_170">[170]</a></span></p>
<p>Immediately following upon the shot, the room was plunged
into absolute darkness. A perfectly incredible uproar ensued,
men and women struggling together and shouting and trampling
one another down, and crockery and dinner things crashing
down from the side-boards and tables on to the floor.</p>
<p>Above the din a sudden hoarse cry of pain rang out, "Help!"
and simultaneously Berthe, who was lost among the mob, heard
a muttered exclamation in her ear and felt two hands groping all
over her body as if trying to identify her. The young nurse was
the only woman in the room wearing a hat. Half swooning with
terror, she felt herself picked up and thrust upon a bench, and
then someone whispered in a vinous voice: "You are not to help
no. 25, the Rambert woman, to escape."</p>
<p>Berthe was so utterly astonished that she overcame her fright
sufficiently to stammer out a question:</p>
<p>"But what—but who——?"</p>
<p>Lower still, but yet more peremptorily, the voice became audible
again.</p>
<p>"Fantômas forbids you to do it! And if you disobey, you die!"</p>
<p>The nurse dropped back upon the bench half fainting with
fright, and the row in the supper room grew worse. Three men
were fighting now, the green man being at grips with two at
once. The green man did not seem to feel the blows rained on
him, but with a strength that was far beyond the ordinary he
gripped hold of an arm and slid his hands along the sleeve, never
letting go of the arm, until he reached the wrist, when wrenching
open the clenched fist he slipped his fingers on to the palm
of the hand. A little exclamation of triumph escaped him, and simultaneously
the owner of the hand uttered an exclamation of
pain, for the green man's fingers had touched a still raw wound
upon the hollow of the palm.</p>
<p>But at that instant his leg was caught between two powerful
knees, and the slightest pressure more would have broken it.
The green man was forced to let go the hand he held; he fell to
the ground with his adversary upon him, and for a moment
thought that he was lost. But at the same moment his adversary
let go of him in turn, having been taken by surprise by yet a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_171">[171]</a></span>
third combatant who joined in the fray and separated the first
two, devoting himself to a furious assault upon the man whom
the green man had tried to capture. The green man passed a
rapid hand over the individual who had just rescued him from
the fierce assault, and was conscious of a shock of surprise as he
identified the young man with the budding beard; thereupon he
collared him firmly by the neck and did not let him go.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>In the crush the combatants had been forced towards the
staircase, and at this narrow entrance into the hall bodies were
being trampled underfoot and piercing screams rent the air.
François Bonbonne had not made the least attempt to interfere.
He knew exactly the proper procedure when trouble of this sort
broke out, and he had gone to the corner of the street and sent
the constable on duty there to the nearest police station for
help. Directly the first gendarmes arrived, François Bonbonne
led them behind the counter in the shop and showed them the
fire hose; with the skill acquired by long practice, they rapidly
unrolled the pipe, introduced it into the narrow mouth of the
staircase, turned on the tap, and proceeded to drench everybody
in the supper room below.</p>
<p>The unexpected sousing pulled the combatants up short, separated
all the champions, and drove the howling and shrieking
mob back to the far end of the room. The operation lasted for a
good five minutes, and when the gendarmes considered that the
customers of the Saint-Anthony's Pig were sufficiently quieted
down, the sergeant threw the light of a lantern, which the proprietor
obligingly had ready for him, over the supper room, and
peremptorily ordered the company to come up, one by one.</p>
<p>Seeing that resistance would be futile, the company obeyed.
As they slowly emerged at the top of the corkscrew staircase,
meek and subdued, the gendarmes at the top arrested them,
slipped handcuffs on them, and sent them off in couples to the
station. When the sergeant assumed that every one had come
out, he went down into the supper room, just to make sure that
nobody was still hiding there. But the room was not quite empty.
One unfortunate man was lying on the floor, bathed in his own<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_172">[172]</a></span>
blood. It was the man with the guitar, and a knife had been
driven through his breast!</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>The couple consisting of the green man and the young man
with the budding beard, of whom his companion had never once
let go since identifying him during the fight in the supper room,
were taken to the station. The clerk, who was taking down the
names of the prisoners, with difficulty repressed an exclamation
of surprise when the green man produced an identification card,
and whispered a few words in his ear.</p>
<p>"Release that gentleman at once," said the clerk. "With regard
to the other——"</p>
<p>"With regard to the other," the green man broke in, "kindly
release him too. I want to keep him with me."</p>
<p>The clerk bowed in consent, and both men were immediately
released from their handcuffs. The young man stared in astonishment
at the individual who a minute before had been his
companion in bonds, and was about to thank him, but the other
grasped him firmly by the wrist, as though to warn him of the
impossibility of flight, and led him out of the police station. In
the street they met the sergeant with a gendarme bringing in the
unfortunate man with the guitar, who was just breathing, and in
whom the officials had recognised a detective-inspector.
Without letting go of the youth, the green man bent forward to
the sergeant and had a brief but animated conversation with
him.</p>
<p>"Yes, sir, that's all," the sergeant said respectfully; "I haven't
anyone else."</p>
<p>The green man stamped his foot in wrath.</p>
<p>"Good Lord! Gurn has got away!"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Towards the rue Montmartre the green man rapidly dragged
his companion, who was trembling in every limb, and utterly at
a loss to guess what the future held in store for him. Suddenly
the green man halted, just under the light of a street lamp outside
the church of Saint-Eustache. He stood squarely in front of
his prisoner and looked him full in the eyes.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_173">[173]</a></span></p>
<p>"I am Juve," he said, "the detective!" and as the young man
stared at him in silent dismay, Juve went on, emphasising each
of his words, and with a sardonic smile flickering over his face.
"And you, Mademoiselle Jeanne—you are Charles Rambert!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_174">[174]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XVIII. A Prisoner and a Witness</span></h2>
<p>Juve had spoken in a tone of command that brooked no reply.
His keen eyes seemed to pierce through Paul and read his inmost
soul. The winking light of the street lamp shed a wan halo
round the lad, who obviously wanted to move away from its radius,
but Juve held him fast.</p>
<p>"Come now, answer! You are Charles Rambert, and you were
Mademoiselle Jeanne?"</p>
<p>"I don't understand," Paul declared.</p>
<p>"Really!" sneered Juve. He hailed a passing cab. "Get in," he
ordered briefly, and pushing the lad in before him he gave an
address to the driver, entered the cab and shut the door. Juve sat
there rubbing his hands as if well pleased with his night's work.
For several minutes he remained silent, and then turned to his
companion.</p>
<p>"You think it is clever to deny it," he remarked, "but do you
imagine it isn't obvious to anyone that you are Charles Rambert,
and that you were disguised as Mademoiselle Jeanne?"</p>
<p>"But you are wrong," Paul insisted. "Charles Rambert is
dead."</p>
<p>"So you know that, do you? Then you admit that you know
whom I am talking about?"</p>
<p>The lad coloured and began to tremble. Juve looked out of
the window, pretending not to notice him, and smiled gently.
Then he went on in a friendly tone. "But you know it's stupid to
deny what can't be denied. Besides, you should remember that
if I know you are Charles Rambert I must know something else
as well; and therefore——"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_175">[175]</a></span></p>
<p>"Well, yes," Paul acknowledged, "I <i>am</i> Charles Rambert, and
I was disguised as Mademoiselle Jeanne. How did you know it?
Why were you at the Saint-Anthony's Pig? Had you come to arrest
me? And where are you taking me now—to prison?"</p>
<p>Juve shrugged his shoulders.</p>
<p>"You want to know too much, my boy. Besides, you ought to
know Paris, and so ought to be able to guess where I told the
driver to go, merely by looking at the streets we are passing
through."</p>
<p>"That is exactly what frightens me," Charles Rambert replied.
"We are on the quays, near the Law Courts."</p>
<p>"And the Police Station, my son. Quite so. Now it's quite useless
to make a scene: you will gain nothing by attempting to get
away. You are in the hands of justice, or rather in my hands,
which is not quite the same thing, so come quietly. That is really
good advice!"</p>
<p>A few minutes later the cab stopped at the Tour Pointue
which has such melancholy associations for so many criminals.
Juve alighted and made his companion alight as well, paid the
driver, and walked up the staircase to the first floor of the building.
It was daylight now, and the men were coming on duty; all
of them saluted Juve as he walked along with his trembling captive.
The detective went down one long passage, turned into another,
and opened a door.</p>
<p>"Go in there," he ordered curtly.</p>
<p>Charles Rambert obeyed, and found himself in a small room
the nature of which he recognised immediately from the furniture
it contained. It was the measuring room of the anthropometric
service. So what he feared was about to happen: Juve was
going to lock him up!</p>
<p>But the detective called out in a loud tone: "Hector, please!"
and one of the men who remained on duty in the department,
in case they were required by any of the detective inspectors to
find the records of any previously convicted criminal, came hurrying
in.</p>
<p>"Ah, M. Juve, and with a bag too! So early? You think he has
been here before?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_176">[176]</a></span></p>
<p>"No," said Juve in a dry tone that put a stop to further indiscreet
questions. "I don't want you to look up my companion's
record, but to take his measurements, and very carefully too."</p>
<p>The man was somewhat surprised at the order, for it was not
usual to be asked to do such work at so very early an hour. He
was rather irritable too at being disturbed from the rest he was
enjoying, and it was very curtly that he spoke to Charles
Rambert.</p>
<p>"Come here, please: the standard first: take off your boots."</p>
<p>Charles Rambert obeyed and stood under the standard of
measurement, and then, as the assistant ordered him, he submitted
to having his fingers smeared with ink so that his finger
prints might be taken, to being photographed, full face and in
profile, and finally to having the width of his head, from ear to
ear, measured with a special pair of caliper compasses.</p>
<p>Hector was surprised by his docility.</p>
<p>"I must say your friend is not very talkative, M. Juve. What
has he been up to?" and as the detective merely shrugged his
shoulders and did not reply, he went on: "That's done, sir. We
will develop the negatives and take the prints, and recopy the
measurements, and the record shall be classified in the register
in a couple of hours."</p>
<p>Charles Rambert grew momentarily more scared. He felt that
he was definitely arrested now. But Juve left the arm-chair in
which he had been resting, and coming up to him laid his hand
upon his shoulder, speaking the while with a certain gentleness.</p>
<p>"Come: there are some other points as to which I wish to examine
you." He led him from the anthropometric room along a
dark corridor, and presently taking a key from his pocket,
opened a door and pushed the lad in before him. "Go in there,"
he said. "This is where we make the dynamometer tests."</p>
<p>A layman looking round the room might almost have supposed
that it was merely some carpenter's shop. Pieces of wood,
of various shapes and sizes and sorts, were arranged along the
wall or laid upon the floor; in glass cases were whole heaps of
strips of metal, five or six inches long, and of varying thickness.</p>
<p>Juve closed the door carefully behind him.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_177">[177]</a></span></p>
<p>"For pity's sake, M. Juve, tell me what you are going to do
with me," Charles Rambert implored.</p>
<p>The detective smiled.</p>
<p>"Well, there you ask a question which I can't answer off-hand.
What am I going to do with you, eh? That still depends upon a
good many things."</p>
<p>As he spoke Juve tossed his hat aside and, looking at a rather
high kind of little table, proceeded to remove from it a grey
cloth which protected it from dust, and drew it into the middle
of the room. This article was composed of a metal body screwed
on to a strong tripod, with a lower tray that moved backwards
and forwards, and two lateral buttresses with a steel cross-piece
firmly bolted on to them above. Upon this framework were two
dynamometers worked by an ingenious piece of mechanism.
Juve looked at Charles Rambert and explained.</p>
<p>"This is Dr. Bertillon's effraction dynamometer. I am going to
make use of it to find out at once whether you are or are not deserving
of some little interest. I don't want to tell you more just
at present." Juve slipped into a specially prepared notch a thin
strip of wood, which he had selected with particular care from
one of the heaps of material arranged along the wall. From a
chest he took a tool which Charles Rambert, who had had some
intimate experience of late with the light-fingered community,
immediately recognised as a jemmy. "Take hold of that," said
Juve, and as Charles took it in his hand he added: "Now put the
jemmy into this groove, and press with all your force. If you can
move that needle to a point which I know, and which it is difficult
but not impossible to reach, you may congratulate yourself
on being in luck."</p>
<p>Stimulated by this encouragement from the detective, Charles
Rambert exerted all his force upon the lever, only afraid that he
might not be strong enough. Juve stopped him very soon.</p>
<p>"That's all right," he said, and substituting a strip of sheet-iron
for the strip of wood, he handed another tool to the lad. "Now
try again."</p>
<p>A few seconds later Juve took a magnifying lens, and closely
examined both the strip of metal and the strip of wood. He gave<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_178">[178]</a></span>
a little satisfied click with his tongue, and seemed to be very
pleased.</p>
<p>"Charles Rambert," he remarked, "I think we are going to do
a very good morning's work. Dr. Bertillon's new apparatus is an
uncommonly useful invention."</p>
<p>The detective might have gone on with his congratulatory
monologue had not an attendant come into the room at that
moment.</p>
<p>"Ah, there you are, M. Juve: I have been looking for you
everywhere. There is someone asking for you who says he knows
you will receive him. I told him this was not the proper time, but
he was so insistent that I promised to bring you his card.
Besides, he says you have given him an appointment."</p>
<p>Juve took the card and glanced at it.</p>
<p>"That's all right," he said. "Take the gentleman into the parlour
and tell him I will be with him in a minute." The attendant
went out and Juve looked at Charles Rambert with a smile. "You
are played out," he said; "before we do anything else common
humanity requires that you should get some rest. Come, follow
me; I will take you to a room where you can throw yourself on a
sofa and get a sleep for a good hour at least while I go and see
this visitor." He led the lad into a small waiting-room, and as
Charles Rambert obediently stretched himself upon the sofa,
Juve looked at the pale and nervous and completely silent boy,
and said with even greater gentleness: "There, go to sleep; sleep
quietly, and presently——"</p>
<p>Juve left the room, and called a man to whom he gave an
order in a low tone.</p>
<p>"Stay with that gentleman, please. He is a friend of mine, but
a friend, you understand, who must not leave this place. I am
going to see some one, but I will come up again presently," and
Juve hurried downstairs to the parlour.</p>
<p>The visitor rose as the door opened, and Juve made a formal
bow.</p>
<p>"M. Gervais Aventin?" he said.</p>
<p>"M. Gervais Aventin," that gentleman replied. "And you are
Detective-Inspector Juve?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_179">[179]</a></span></p>
<p>"I am, sir," the detective answered, and pointing his visitor to
a chair he took a seat himself at a small table littered with official
documents.</p>
<p>"Sir," Juve began, "I ventured to send you that pressing invitation
to come to Paris to-day, because from enquiries I had
made about you, I was sure that you were a man with a sense of
duty, who would not resent being put to inconvenience when it
was a question of co-operating in a work of justice and of truth."</p>
<p>The visitor, a man of perhaps thirty, of somewhat fashionable
appearance and careful though quiet dress, manifested much
surprise.</p>
<p>"Enquiries about me, sir? And pray, why? I must confess that
I was very much astonished when I received your letter informing
me that the famous Detective-Inspector Juve wished to see
me, and at first I suspected some practical joke. On consideration
I decided to obey your summons without further pressing,
but I did not imagine that you would have made any enquiries
about me. How do you know me, may I ask?"</p>
<p>Juve smiled.</p>
<p>"Is it the fact," he enquired, instead of replying directly, for
like the good detective that he was, intensely keen on his work,
he enjoyed mystifying people with whom he conversed, "is it the
fact that your name is Gervais Aventin? A civil engineer? The
possessor of considerable private means? About to be married?
And that lately you made a short journey to Limoges?"</p>
<p>The young man nodded and smiled.</p>
<p>"Your information is perfectly correct in every particular. But
I do not yet understand what crime of mine can have subjected
me to these enquiries on your part."</p>
<p>Juve smiled again.</p>
<p>"I wondered, sir, why you vouchsafed no answer to the local
enquiries which have been made at my instance, to the advertisements
which I have had inserted in the papers, in which I
discreetly made it known that the police wanted to get into communication
with all the passengers who travelled first class, in
the slow train from Paris to Luchon, on the night of the 23rd of
December last."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_180">[180]</a></span></p>
<p>This time the young man looked anxious.</p>
<p>"Great Scott!" he exclaimed, "are you in the employment of
my future father-in-law?"</p>
<p>Juve burst into a roar of laughter.</p>
<p>"First acknowledge that you did travel by that train on that
night: that you got into it at Vierzon, where you live and where
you are going to be married; and that you were going to
Limoges to see a lady—and that you did not want your fiancée's
family to know anything about it."</p>
<p>Gervais Aventin pulled himself together.</p>
<p>"I had no idea that the official police undertook espionage of
that sort," he said rather drily. "But it is true, sir, that I went to
Limoges—my last post before I was appointed to Vierzon—to
take a final farewell to a lady. But since you are so accurately informed
about all this, since you even know what train I went by,
a train I deliberately chose because in little places like Vierzon
so much notice is taken of people who travel by the express, you
must also know——"</p>
<p>Juve checked him with a wave of the hand.</p>
<p>"A truce to jesting," he said; "excuse me, sir, I was only amusing
myself by observing once more how quickly decent people,
who have a little peccadillo on their conscience, are disturbed
when they think they have been found out. Your love affairs do
not matter to me, sir; I don't want to know if you have a lady
friend, or not. The information I want from you is of a very different
nature. Tell me simply this: in what circumstances did
you make that journey? What carriage did you get into? Who
travelled with you in that carriage? I am asking you because, sir,
I have every reason to believe that you travelled that night with
a murderer who committed a crime of particular atrocity, and I
think you may be able to give me some interesting information."</p>
<p>The young man, who had been looking grave, smiled once
more.</p>
<p>"I would rather have that than an enquiry into my defunct
love affairs. Well, sir, I got into the train at Vierzon, into a first-class
carriage——"</p>
<p>"What kind of carriage?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_181">[181]</a></span></p>
<p>"One of the old-fashioned corridor carriages; that is to say, not
a corridor communicating with the other carriages, but a single
carriage with four compartments, two in the middle opening on
to the corridor, and two at the ends communicating with the
corridor by a small door."</p>
<p>"I know," said Juve; "the lavatory is in the centre, and the end
compartments are like the ordinary noncorridor compartments,
except that they have only seven seats, and also have the little
door communicating with the narrow passage down one side of
the carriage."</p>
<p>"That's it. I got into the smoking compartment at the end."</p>
<p>"Don't go too quick," said Juve. "Tell me whom you saw in the
various compartments. Let us go even farther back. You were on
the platform, waiting for the train; it came in; what happened
then?"</p>
<p>"You want to be very precise," Gervais Aventin remarked.
"Well, when the train pulled up I looked for the first-class carriage;
it was a few yards away from me, and the corridor was
alongside the platform. I got into the corridor and wanted to
choose my compartment. I remember clearly that I went first to
the rear compartment, the last one in the carriage. I could not
get into that, for the door opening into it from the corridor was
locked."</p>
<p>"That is correct," Juve nodded. "I know from the guard that
that compartment was empty. What did you do then?"</p>
<p>"I turned back and, passing the ladies' compartment and the
lavatory, decided to take my seat in the one next it communicating
with the corridor. But luck was against me: a pane of glass
was broken and it was bitterly cold there; so I had to fall back on
the only compartment left, the smoking one towards the front of
the train."</p>
<p>"Were there many of you there?"</p>
<p>"I thought at first that I was going to have a fellow-traveller,
for there was some luggage and a rug arranged on the seat. But
the passenger must have been in the lavatory, for I didn't see
him. I lay down on the other seat and went to sleep. When I got
out of the train at Limoges, my fellow-traveller must have been<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_182">[182]</a></span>
in the lavatory again, for I remember quite distinctly that he was
not on the opposite seat. I thought at the time how easy it would
have been for me to steal his luggage and walk off with his valise:
nobody would have seen me."</p>
<p>Juve had listened intently to every word of the story. He asked
for one further detail with a certain anxiety in his tone.</p>
<p>"Tell me, sir, when you woke up did you have any impression
that the baggage arranged on the seat opposite yours had been
disturbed at all? Might the traveller, whom you did not see, have
come in for a sleep while you yourself were asleep?"</p>
<p>Gervais Aventin made a little gesture of uncertainty.</p>
<p>"I can't answer in the affirmative, M. Juve. I did not notice
that; and, besides, when I got into the compartment, the shade
was pulled down over the lamp, and the curtains were drawn
across the windows. I hardly saw how the things were arranged.
And then, when I got out at Limoges I was in a hurry, and only
thought about finding my ticket and jumping on to the platform.
But I do not think the other fellow did take his place while I
was asleep. I did not hear a sound, and yet I did not sleep at all
heavily."</p>
<p>"So you travelled in a first-class compartment in the slow train
from Paris to Luchon on the night of the 23rd of December, and
in that compartment there was the luggage of a traveller whom
you did not see—who may not have been there?"</p>
<p>"Yes," said Gervais Aventin, and, as the detective sat silent for
a moment, he enquired: "Is my information too vague to be of
any use to you?"</p>
<p>Juve was wondering inwardly why the dickens Etienne
Rambert was not in that compartment when, according to the
depositions of the guard, he must have been there; but he said
nothing of this. Instead, he said:</p>
<p>"Your information is most valuable, sir. You have told me
everything I wanted to know."</p>
<p>Gervais Aventin displayed still more surprise.</p>
<p>"Well," he said, "by way of return, M. Juve, tell me something
which puzzles me. How did you know I travelled by that train
that night?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_183">[183]</a></span></p>
<p>The detective drew out his pocket-book, and from an inner
pocket produced a first-class ticket, which he held out to the
engineer.</p>
<p>"That is very simple," he replied. "Here is your ticket. I
wanted to know exactly who everyone was who travelled in that
first-class compartment, so I sent for all the first-class tickets
which were given up by passengers who left the train at the different
stations. That's how I got yours: it had been issued at
Vierzon, the station where you got in, so I interrogated the clerk
at the booking-office who gave me a description of you; then I
sent down an inspector to Vierzon to make discreet enquiries,
and he got me all the information I required. All I had to do
then was to write and ask you to come here to-day; and the
regrettable story of your broken relations with the lady was an
ample guarantee to me that you would be punctual at the
appointment!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_184">[184]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XIX. Jérôme Fandor</span></h2>
<p>Whistling a quick-step, sure sign with him of a light heart,
Juve opened the door of the little room where he had left
Charles Rambert, and looked at the sleeping lad.</p>
<p>"It's a fine thing to be young," he remarked to the man he had
left on guard; "that boy plunges into the wildest adventures and
shaves the scaffold by an inch, and yet after one late night he
sleeps as peacefully as any chancellor of the Legion of Honour!"
He shook the lad with a friendly hand. "Get up, lazy-bones! It's
ten o'clock: high time for me to carry you off."</p>
<p>"Where to?" the unhappy boy asked, rubbing his eyes.</p>
<p>"There's no doubt about inquisitiveness being your besetting
sin," Juve replied cryptically. "Well, we've got a quarter of an
hour's drive in front of us. But you're not going to prison; I'm
going to take you home with me!"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Juve had taken off his collar and tie and put on an old jacket,
had set a great bowl of bread and milk in front of Charles
Rambert, and was leisurely enjoying his own breakfast.</p>
<p>"I didn't want to answer any questions just now," he said, "because
I hate talking in cabs where I have to sit by a man's side,
and can't see him or hear half he says. But now that we are snug
and comfortable here, I've no right to keep you waiting any
longer, and I'll give you a bit of good news."</p>
<p>"Snug" and "comfortable" were the right words with which to
describe Juve's private abode. The detective had attained an honourable
and lucrative position in his profession, and, exposed
as he was in the course of his work to all manner of dangers and<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_185">[185]</a></span>
privations, had compensated himself by making an entirely satisfactory,
if not luxurious, nest where he could rest after his
labours.</p>
<p>When he had finished his breakfast he lighted a big cigar and
sank into an easy chair, crossing his hands behind his head. He
turned a steady gaze upon Charles Rambert, who was still completely
puzzled, and half frightened by this sudden amiability,
and did not know whether he was a prisoner or not.</p>
<p>"I will give you a bit of good news; that is, that you are innocent
of the Langrune affair when you were Charles Rambert,
and innocent also of the Danidoff affair, when you were
Mademoiselle Jeanne. I need not say anything about the scrap
last night, in which you played a still more distinguished part."</p>
<p>"Why tell me that?" asked Charles Rambert nervously. "Of
course I know I did not rob Princess Sonia Danidoff; but how
did you recognise me last night, and how did you find out that I
was Mademoiselle Jeanne?"</p>
<p>Juve smiled, and shook back a lock of hair that was falling over
his eyes.</p>
<p>"Listen, my boy: do you suppose that thundering blow you
dealt the excellent Henri Verbier when he was making love to
Mademoiselle Jeanne, could fail to make me determined to find
out who that young lady was who had the strength of a man?"</p>
<p>The allusion made Charles Rambert most uneasy.</p>
<p>"But that does not explain how you recognised me in Paul to-night.
I recognised you in Henri Verbier at the hotel, but I had
no idea that it was you last night."</p>
<p>"That's nothing," said Juve with a shake of the head. "And you
may understand once for all that when I have once looked anybody
square in the face, he needs to be an uncommonly clever
fellow to escape me afterwards by means of any disguise. You
don't know how to make up, but I do; and that's why I took you
in and you did not take me in."</p>
<p>"What makes you believe I did not rob Princess Sonia
Danidoff?" Charles Rambert asked after a pause. "I am quite
aware that everything points to my having been the thief."</p>
<p>"Not quite everything," Juve answered gently. "There are one<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_186">[186]</a></span>
or two things you don't know, and I'll tell you one of them. The
Princess was robbed by the same man who robbed Mme. Van
den Rosen, wasn't she? Well, Mme. Van den Rosen was the victim
of a burglary: some of the furniture in her room was broken
into, and the tests I made this morning with the dynamometer
proved to me that you are not strong enough to have caused
those fractures."</p>
<p>"Not strong enough?" Charles Rambert ejaculated.</p>
<p>"No. I told you at the time that your innocence would be
proved if you were strong enough, but I said that to prevent you
from playing tricks and not putting out all your strength. As a
matter of fact it was your comparative weakness that saved you.
The dynamometer tests and the figures I obtained just now
prove absolutely that you are innocent of the Van den Rosen
robbery and, consequently, of the robbery from Sonia
Danidoff."</p>
<p>Again the lad reflected for a minute or two.</p>
<p>"But you didn't know who I was when you came to the hotel,
did you? And therefore had no suspicion that I was Charles
Rambert? That's true, isn't it? How did you find out? I was supposed
to be dead."</p>
<p>"That was a child's job," Juve replied. "I got the anthropometric
records of the body that had been buried as yours, and I
planned to get symmetrical photographs of you in your character
of Mademoiselle Jeanne, as I did of you to-day at head-quarters.
My first job was to lay hands upon Mademoiselle Jeanne,
and I very soon found her, as I expected, turned into a man
again, and living in the most disreputable company. I made any
number of enquiries, and when I went to the Saint-Anthony's
Pig last evening I knew that it was some unknown person who
had been buried in your stead; that Paul was Mademoiselle
Jeanne; and that Mademoiselle Jeanne was Charles Rambert. It
was my intention to arrest you, and to ascertain definitely by
means of the dynamometer that you were innocent of the
Langrune and the Danidoff crimes."</p>
<p>"What you tell me about the dynamometer explains how you
know I am not the man who committed the robbery at the hotel,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_187">[187]</a></span>
but what clears me in your eyes of the Langrune murder?"</p>
<p>"Bless my soul!" Juve retorted, "you are arguing as if you
wanted to prove you were guilty. Well, my boy, it's the same
story as the other. The man who murdered the Marquise de
Langrune smashed things, and the dynamometer has proved
that you are not strong enough to have been the man."</p>
<p>"And suppose I had been mad at the time," Charles Rambert
said, his hesitation and his tone betraying his anxiety about the
answer, "could I have been strong enough then? Might I have
committed these crimes without knowing anything about it?"</p>
<p>But Juve shook his head.</p>
<p>"I know: you are referring to your mother, and are haunted by
an idea that through some hereditary taint you might be a somnambulist
and have done these things in your sleep. Come,
Charles Rambert, finish your breakfast and put all that out of
your head. To begin with, you would not have been strong
enough, even then; and in the next place there is nothing at
present to show that you are mad, nor even that your poor
mother—— But I need not go on: I've got some rather odd notions
on that subject."</p>
<p>"Then, M. Juve——"</p>
<p>"Drop the 'monsieur'; call me 'Juve.'"</p>
<p>"Then, if you know that I am innocent, you can go and tell my
father? I have nothing to fear? I can reappear in my own
name?"</p>
<p>Juve looked at the lad with an ironical smile.</p>
<p>"How you go ahead!" he exclaimed. "Please understand that
although I do believe you are innocent, I am almost certainly
the only person who does. And unfortunately I have not yet got
any evidence that would be sufficiently convincing and certain
to put the persuasion of your guilt out of your father's head, or
anybody else's. This is not the time for you to reappear: it would
simply mean that you would be arrested by some detective who
knows less than I do, and thrown into prison as you confidently
expected to be this morning."</p>
<p>"Then what is to become of me?"</p>
<p>"What do you think of doing yourself?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_188">[188]</a></span></p>
<p>"Going to see my father."</p>
<p>"No, no," Juve protested once more. "I tell you not to go. It
would be stupid and utterly useless. Wait a few days, a few
weeks if need be. When I have put my hand on Fantômas'
shoulder, I will be the very first to take you to your father, and
proclaim your innocence."</p>
<p>"Why wait until Fantômas is arrested?" Charles Rambert
asked, the mere sound of the name seeming to wake all his former
enthusiasm on the subject of that famous criminal.</p>
<p>"Because if you are innocent of the charge brought against
you, it is extremely likely that Fantômas is the guilty party.
When he is laid by the heels you will be able to protest your innocence
without any fear."</p>
<p>Charles Rambert sat silent for some minutes, musing on the
odd chance of destiny which required him to make his own return
to normal life contingent on the arrest of a mysterious
criminal, who was merely suspected, and had never been seen
nor discovered.</p>
<p>"What do you advise me to do?" he asked presently.</p>
<p>The detective got up and began to pace the room.</p>
<p>"Well," he began, "the first fact is that I am interested in you,
and the next is, that while I was having that rough-and-tumble
last night with that scoundrel in the supper-room, I thought for
a minute or two that it was all up with me: your chipping in
saved my life. On the other hand I may be said to have saved
your life now by ascertaining your innocence and preventing
your arrest. So we are quits in a way. But you began the delicate
attentions, and I have only paid you back, so it's up to me to start
a new series and not turn you out into the street where you
would inevitably get into fresh trouble. So this is what I propose:
change your name and go and take a room somewhere; get into
proper clothes and then come back to me, and I'll give you a letter
to a friend of mine who is on one of the big evening papers.
You are well educated, and I know you are energetic. You are
keen on everything connected with the police, and you'll get on
splendidly as a reporter. You will be able to earn an honest and
respectable name that way. Would you like to try that idea?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_189">[189]</a></span></p>
<p>"It's awfully good of you," Charles Rambert said gratefully. "I
should love to be able to earn my living by work so much to my
taste."</p>
<p>Juve cut his thanks short, and held out some bank-notes.</p>
<p>"There's some money; now clear out; it's high time we both
got a little sleep. Get busy settling into rooms, and in a fortnight
I shall expect you to be editor of <i>La Capitale</i>."</p>
<p>"Under what name shall you introduce me to your friend?"
Charles Rambert asked, after a little nervous pause.</p>
<p>"H'm!" said Juve with a smile: "it will have to be an alias of
course."</p>
<p>"Yes; and as it will be the name I shall write under it ought to
be an easy one to remember."</p>
<p>"Something arresting, like Fantômas!" said Juve chaffingly,
amused by the curious childishness of this lad, who could take
keen interest in such a trifle when he was in so critical a situation.
"Choose something not too common for the first name;
and something short for the other. Why not keep the first syllable
of Fantômas? Oh, I've got it—Fandor; what about Jérôme
Fandor?"</p>
<p>Charles Rambert murmured it over.</p>
<p>"Jérôme Fandor! Yes, you are right, it sounds well."</p>
<p>Juve pushed him out of the door.</p>
<p>"Well, Jérôme Fandor, leave me to my slumbers, and go and
rig yourself out, and get ready for the new life that I'm going to
open up for you!"</p>
<p>Bewildered by the amazing adventures of which he had just
been the central figure, Charles Rambert, or Jérôme Fandor,
walked down Juve's staircase wondering. "Why should he take so
much trouble about me? What interest or what motive can he
have? And how on earth does he find out such a wonderful lot
of things?"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_190">[190]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XX. A Cup of Tea</span></h2>
<p>After the tragic death of her husband, Lady Beltham—whose
previous life had inclined to the austere—withdrew into almost
complete retirement. The world of gaiety and fashion
knew her no more. But in the world where poverty and suffering
reign, in hospital wards and squalid streets, a tall and
beautiful woman might often be seen, robed all in black, with
distinguished bearing and eyes serene and grave, distributing
alms and consolation as she moved. It was Lady Beltham, kind,
good and very pitiful, bent on the work of charity to which she
had vowed her days.</p>
<p>Yet she had not allowed herself to be crushed by sorrow; after
the tragedy which left her a widow, she had assumed the effective
control of her husband's property, and, helped by faithful
friends, had carried on his interests and administered his estates,
spreading a halo of kindness all around her.</p>
<p>To help her in the heavy correspondence entailed by all these
affairs, she found three secretaries none too many. On M.
Etienne Rambert's recommendation, Thérèse Auvernois was
now one of these, and the young girl was perfectly happy in her
new surroundings; time was helping her to forget the tragedy
which had taken her grandmother from her at Beaulieu, and she
enjoyed the company of the well-born, well-bred English
gentlewomen.</p>
<p>Lady Beltham was reclining on a sofa in the great hall of her
house at Neuilly. It was a spacious room, furnished half as a
lounge and half as an office, and Lady Beltham liked to receive
people there. A large glass-enclosed balcony commanded a view<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_191">[191]</a></span>
over the garden and the boulevard Richard Wallace beyond,
with the Bois de Boulogne beyond that again. A few minutes before,
a footman had brought in a table and set out tea-things,
and Lady Beltham was reading while Thérèse and the two
young English girls were chattering among themselves.</p>
<p>The telephone bell rang and Thérèse answered it.</p>
<p>"Hullo? Yes ... yes: you want to know if you may call this
evening? The Reverend—oh, yes: you have just come from
Scotland? Hold on a minute." She turned to Lady Beltham. "It
is Mr. William Hope, and he wants to know if you will see him
to-night. He has just come from your place in Scotland."</p>
<p>"The dear man!" exclaimed Lady Beltham; "of course he may
come," and as Thérèse turned lightly to convey her permission
to the clergyman waiting at the other end of the line, she caught
a smile on the face of one of the other girls. "What is the joke,
Lisbeth?" she enquired.</p>
<p>The girl laughed brightly.</p>
<p>"I think the worthy parson must have smelt the tea and toast,
and wants to make up for the wretched dinner he got in the
train."</p>
<p>"You are incorrigible," Lady Beltham replied. "Mr. Hope is
above such material matters."</p>
<p>"Indeed he isn't, Lady Beltham," the girl persisted. "Why,
only the other day he told Thérèse that all food deserved respect
and esteem directly a blessing had been asked upon it, and that
a badly cooked steak was a kind of sacrilege."</p>
<p>"A badly cooked pheasant," Thérèse corrected her.</p>
<p>"You are both wicked little slanderers," Lady Beltham
protested gently, "and don't know the blessing a good appetite
is. You do, Susannah, don't you?"</p>
<p>Susannah, a pretty Irish girl, looked up from a letter she was
reading, and blushed.</p>
<p>"Oh, Lady Beltham, I've been ever so much less hungry since
Harry's ship sailed."</p>
<p>"I don't quite see the connection," Lady Beltham answered.
"Love is good nourishment for the soul, but not for the body.
However, a good appetite is nothing to be ashamed of, and you<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_192">[192]</a></span>
ought to keep your roses for your future husband, and qualify in
every way to be an excellent mother of a family."</p>
<p>"With lots and lots of children," Lisbeth went on wickedly:
"seven or eight daughters at the very least, all of whom will
marry nice young clergymen when their time comes and——"</p>
<p>She stopped speaking and the light chatter died away as a footman
entered and announced the Reverend William Hope, who
followed him immediately into the room, an elderly man with a
full, clean-shaven face and a comfortable portliness of figure.</p>
<p>Lady Beltham offered him a cordial hand.</p>
<p>"I am delighted you are back," she said. "Will you have a cup
of tea with us?"</p>
<p>The parson made a general bow to the girls gathered about
the table.</p>
<p>"I got a wretched dinner in the train," he began, but Lisbeth
interrupted him.</p>
<p>"Don't you think this tea smells delicious?" she asked.</p>
<p>The parson put out his hand to take the cup she offered to
him, and bowed and smiled.</p>
<p>"Precisely what I was going to observe, Miss Lisbeth."</p>
<p>Thérèse and Susannah turned away to hide their amusement,
and Lady Beltham adroitly changed the subject. She moved towards
her writing-table.</p>
<p>"Mr. Hope must have much to tell me, girls, and it is getting
late. I must get to business. Did you have a good journey?"</p>
<p>"Quite as good as usual, Lady Beltham. The people at
Scotwell Hill are very plucky and good, but it will be a hard winter;
there is snow on the hills already."</p>
<p>"Have the women and children had all their woollen things?"</p>
<p>"Oh, yes: twelve hundred garments have been distributed according
to a list drawn up by the under-steward; here it is," and he
handed a paper to Lady Beltham, who passed it on to Susannah.</p>
<p>"I will ask you to check the list," she said to the girl, and
turned again to the clergyman. "The under-steward is a good
fellow, but he is a rabid politician; he may have omitted some
families that are openly radical; but I think charity should be
given equally to all, for poverty makes no political distinctions."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_193">[193]</a></span></p>
<p>"That is the right Christian view," the clergyman said approvingly.</p>
<p>"And what about the sanatorium at Glasgow?" Lady Beltham
went on.</p>
<p>"It is very nearly finished," the good man answered. "I have
got your lawyers to cut down the contractor's accounts by something
like fifteen per cent, which means a saving of nearly three
hundred pounds."</p>
<p>"Excellent," said Lady Beltham, and she turned to Thérèse.
"You must add that three hundred pounds to the funds of the
Scotwell Hill coal charity," she said. "They will want all of it if
the winter is going to be a hard one," and Thérèse made a note
of the instruction, full of admiration for Lady Beltham's simple
generosity.</p>
<p>But Mr. Hope was fidgeting on his chair. He seized an opportunity
when Lady Beltham, busy making notes, had turned
her deep and steady eyes away from him, to say in a low tone:</p>
<p>"Have I your permission just to mention—poor Lord
Beltham?"</p>
<p>Lady Beltham started, and her face betrayed an emotion
which she bravely controlled. Hearing the name pronounced,
the three girls withdrew to the far end of the room, where they
began to talk among themselves. Lady Beltham signified her assent,
and Mr. Hope began.</p>
<p>"You know, dear friend, this has been my first visit to Scotland
since Lord Beltham's death. I found your tenants still grievously
upset by the tragedy that occurred nearly a year ago. They have
got by heart all the newspaper accounts of the mysterious circumstances
attending Lord Beltham's death, but those are not
enough to satisfy the sympathetic curiosity of these excellent
people, and I was obliged to tell them over and over again in full
detail—all we knew."</p>
<p>"I hope no scandal has gathered round his name," said Lady
Beltham quickly.</p>
<p>"You need have no fear of that," the clergyman replied in the
same low tone. "The rumour that got about when the crime was
first discovered, that Lord Beltham had been surprised in an in<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_194">[194]</a></span>trigue
and killed in revenge, has not won acceptance. Local opinion
agrees that he was decoyed into a trap and killed by the man
Gurn, who meant to rob him, but who was either surprised or
thought he was going to be, and fled before he had time to take
the money or the jewels from the body of his victim. They know
that the murderer has never been caught, but they also know
that there is a price on his head, and they all hope the police—— Oh,
forgive me for recalling all these painful memories!"</p>
<p>While he had been speaking, Lady Beltham's face had expressed
almost every shade of emotion and distress; it seemed
to be drawn with pain at his concluding words. But she made an
effort to control herself, and spoke resignedly.</p>
<p>"It cannot be helped, dear Mr. Hope. Go on."</p>
<p>But the clergyman changed the topic.</p>
<p>"Oh, I was quite forgetting," he said more brightly. "The
under-steward has turned out the two Tillys, quite on his own
authority: you must remember them, two brothers, blacksmiths,
who drank a great deal and paid very little, and created so much
scandal in the place."</p>
<p>"I object to the under-steward doing any such thing without
referring to me first," Lady Beltham exclaimed warmly. "Man's
duty is to persuade and forgive, not to judge and punish.
Kindness breeds kindness, and it is pity that wins amendment.
Why should a subordinate, my under-steward, presume to do
what I would not permit myself to do?"</p>
<p>She had sprung to her feet and was pacing excitedly about the
room; she had wholly dropped the impassive mask she habitually
wore, concealing her real personality.</p>
<p>The three girls watched her in silence.</p>
<p>The door opened anew, and Silbertown came in, the major-domo
of Lady Beltham's establishment at Neuilly. He brought
the evening letters, and the girls speedily took all the envelopes
and newspapers from the tray and began to sort and open them,
while the major-domo entered into conversation with his mistress,
and the Rev. William Hope seized the opportunity to say
good night, and take his leave.</p>
<p>Many of the letters were merely appeals to help in money or<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_195">[195]</a></span>
in kind, but one long letter Lisbeth handed to Lady Beltham.
She glanced at the signature.</p>
<p>"Ah, here is news of M. Etienne Rambert," she exclaimed,
and as Thérèse instinctively drew near, knowing that she, too,
might hear something of what her old friend had written, Lady
Beltham put the letter into her hand. "You read it, my dear, and
then you can tell me presently what he has to say."</p>
<p>Thérèse read the letter eagerly. M. Etienne Rambert had left
Paris a week before, upon a long and important journey. The energetic
old fellow was to make a trip in Germany first, and then
go from Hamburg to England, where he had some business to
attend to on behalf of Lady Beltham, with whom he was on
more confidential terms than ever. Then he meant to sail from
Southampton and spend the winter in Colombia, where he had
important interests of his own to look after.</p>
<p>While Thérèse was reading, Lady Beltham continued her
conversation with her major-domo.</p>
<p>"I am glad you had the park gate seen to this afternoon," she
said. "You know how nervous I am. My childhood in Scotland
was very lonely, and ever since then I have had a vague terror of
solitude and darkness."</p>
<p>The major-domo reassured her: he had no lack of self-confidence.</p>
<p>"There is nothing for your ladyship to be afraid of; the house
is perfectly safe, and carefully guarded. Walter, the porter, is a
first-rate watch-dog and always sleeps with one eye open. And I,
too——"</p>
<p>"Yes, I know, Silbertown," the young widow replied; "and
when I give myself time to think I am not nervous. Thank you;
you can leave me now."</p>
<p>She turned to the three girls.</p>
<p>"I am tired, dears; we won't stay up any later."</p>
<p>Lisbeth and Susannah kissed her affectionately and went
away. Thérèse lingered a moment, to bring a book, a Bible, and
place it on a table close to Lady Beltham's chair. Lady Beltham
laid a hand upon her head as if in blessing, and said gently:</p>
<p>"Good night; God bless you, dear child!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_196">[196]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XXI. Lord Beltham's Murderer</span></h2>
<p>It was on the point of midnight, and absolute stillness reigned
throughout the house.</p>
<p>But Lady Beltham had not gone to bed. Although she had remained
in the great hall where she did her work, she had been
unable to settle down to any occupation. She had read a little,
and begun a letter, got up and sat down; and finally, beginning
to feel chilly, she had drawn an easy chair up to the hearth,
where a log was just burning out, and stretching out her slippers
to the warmth had fallen into a waking dream.</p>
<p>A sound caught her ear and she sat upright. At first she
thought it was some trick of the imagination, but in another
minute the noise grew louder; there was the hurrying of feet
and voices, muffled at first but rapidly becoming louder, and at
last a regular uproar, doors banging, glass breaking, and shouts
from all parts of the house. Lady Beltham jumped up, nervous
and trembling; she was just going to the window when she heard
a shot and stopped dead where she stood. Then she rushed out
into the vestibule.</p>
<p>"Help!" she screamed. "What on earth is the matter?" and remembering
the girls for whom she had assumed responsibility,
she called out anxiously for them. "Lisbeth! Thérèse! Susannah!
Come to me!"</p>
<p>Doors upstairs were flung open, and with their hair streaming
over their night-dresses Thérèse and Susannah rushed downstairs
and crouched down by her side, stifling moans of terror.</p>
<p>"Lisbeth? Where is Lisbeth?" Lady Beltham asked sharply.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_197">[197]</a></span></p>
<p>At the same moment she appeared, her face distorted with
fright.</p>
<p>"Oh, Lady Beltham, it's dreadful! There's a man, a burglar in
the garden! And Walter is throttling him! They are fighting
dreadfully! They'll kill one another!"</p>
<p>Silbertown, the major-domo, came rushing in just then.
Seeing the three girls in their night-dresses he made as if to
draw back, but Lady Beltham called him in and demanded explanations.</p>
<p>"We had just finished our rounds," he answered breathlessly,
"when we caught sight of a man hiding in the shadows, a thief
probably. When we shouted to him he ran away, but we ran after
him and seized him; he resisted and there was a fight. But we
have got him and the police will take him away in a few minutes."</p>
<p>Lady Beltham listened, with jaw set and hands clenched.</p>
<p>"A thief?" she said, controlling her emotion. "How do you
know he is a thief?"</p>
<p>"Well," stammered the major-domo, "he is very poorly
dressed, and besides, what was he doing in the garden?"</p>
<p>Lady Beltham was recovering her calm.</p>
<p>"What excuse did he give for being there?" she asked coldly.</p>
<p>"We didn't give him time to invent one," said the major-domo.
"We collared him almost as soon as we saw him. And you know,
madame, how tremendously powerful Walter is: Walter gave
him all he deserved!" and the major-domo clenched his fists and
made an expressive exhibition of the porter's reception of the
stranger.</p>
<p>Lisbeth was still overcome by what she had seen.</p>
<p>"Oh, the blood!" she muttered hysterically; "it was streaming!"</p>
<p>Lady Beltham spoke angrily to the major-domo.</p>
<p>"I hate brutality: is the man seriously hurt? I hope not. You
ought to have questioned him before assaulting him. No one in
my house has a right to use violence. 'Whoso smites with the
sword shall perish by the sword'!"</p>
<p>The major-domo heard her in silent astonishment: it was not
at all what he expected to be told, in view of all the circumstances.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_198">[198]</a></span></p>
<p>Lady Beltham went on more gently:</p>
<p>"I suppose I shall have to apologise to this man for your
wrong and thoughtless behaviour."</p>
<p>"Apologise?" exclaimed Silbertown in amazement. "Surely
your ladyship will not do that?"</p>
<p>"One must not shrink from humiliation when one has been in
the wrong," said Lady Beltham, in the pulpit manner she affected.
"Tell Walter to come to me."</p>
<p>A few minutes later the porter, a muscular giant of a man,
came into the room and made a clumsy bow.</p>
<p>"How was it possible for anyone to get into the house at this
time of night?" his mistress enquired coldly.</p>
<p>Walter dropped his eyes and twisted his cap nervously.</p>
<p>"I hope your ladyship will forgive me. I caught the fellow, and
as he was struggling I hit him. Then two of the footmen came,
and they are looking after him in the kitchen."</p>
<p>"Has he given any explanation of his presence here since you
assaulted him—at which I am very angry?" said Lady Beltham.</p>
<p>"He hasn't said anything; at least——"</p>
<p>"Well?"</p>
<p>"I don't like to tell you."</p>
<p>"Please do like!" said Lady Beltham irritably.</p>
<p>"Well," Walter replied, overcoming his nervousness with an
effort, "he says your ladyship is well known for your charity to
everybody, and—he wants to see you."</p>
<p>There was a moment's pause.</p>
<p>"I will see him," said Lady Beltham at last, in a half-stifled voice.</p>
<p>"Will your ladyship allow me to point out the danger of doing
any such thing?" Silbertown exclaimed. "Very likely the man is a
lunatic! Or it may be a trick: Lord Beltham was murdered, and
perhaps——"</p>
<p>Lady Beltham looked intently at the major-domo, seemingly
trying to read his thoughts. Then she answered slowly:</p>
<p>"I will see him. I will be more pitiful than you," and as the
major-domo and the porter made a gesture of futile protest, she
added peremptorily: "I have given my orders: kindly obey."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_199">[199]</a></span></p>
<p>When the two men had reluctantly left the room, Lady
Beltham turned to the three girls.</p>
<p>"You had better leave me, darlings," she said, kindly but
firmly. "Run away: excitement is bad for you. Go back to bed.
No, I assure you I shall be in no danger whatever," and for a few
minutes she was left alone.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>"Speak," said Lady Beltham in a toneless voice.</p>
<p>The major-domo and the porter had led in, and placed before
her, a man with unkempt hair and ragged beard; he was dressed
entirely in black, and his face was tired and haggard. Lady
Beltham, ghastly pale, was leaning for support against the back
of an arm-chair. The man did not raise his eyes to her.</p>
<p>"I will not speak unless we are alone," he answered dully.</p>
<p>"Alone?" said Lady Beltham, fighting down her emotion.
"Then it is something serious you have to tell me?"</p>
<p>"If you know anything of people in misfortune, Madame," the
man answered gently, "you know that they do not like to humiliate
themselves before—before those who cannot understand,"
and he nodded towards the major-domo and the porter.</p>
<p>"I do know something of misfortune," Lady Beltham replied,
in firmer tones; "and I will hear you alone." She looked at her
two servants. "Leave us, please."</p>
<p>The major-domo started.</p>
<p>"Leave you alone with him? It's madness!" and as Lady
Beltham merely looked at him in haughty surprise, he began to
withdraw in confusion, but still protesting. "It's—it's—— Your
ladyship has no idea what this fellow wants: do please——"</p>
<p>But Lady Beltham curtly cut him short.</p>
<p>"That is enough!"</p>
<p>A heavy velvet curtain fell over the closing door, and in the
room, that was dimly lighted by a small electric lamp, Lady
Beltham was alone with the strange individual to whom she had
so readily, so oddly, consented to accord a private interview. She
followed her servants to the door and locked it after them. Then
with a sudden movement she sprang towards the man, who was<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_200">[200]</a></span>
standing motionless in the middle of the room following her
with his eyes, and flung herself into his arms.</p>
<p>"Oh, Gurn, my darling, my darling!" she cried. "I love you! I
love you, darling!" She looked up at him and saw blood upon his
forehead. "Good God! The brutes have hurt you! What pain you
must be in! Give me your eyes, your lips!" With kisses from her
own lips she stanched the blood that was trickling down his
cheeks, and with her fingers she smoothed his hair. "I am so
happy!" she murmured, and broke off again. "But you are mad!
Why, why come here like this, and let yourself be caught and
tortured so?"</p>
<p>Moodily Gurn answered, returning kiss for kiss.</p>
<p>"Time has been so long without you! And this evening I was
prowling round and saw a light. I thought that every one would
be asleep—except you, of course. And so I came straight to you,
over walls, and gates—drawn to you like a moth to a candle: and
that is all!"</p>
<p>With shining eyes and heaving breast Lady Beltham clung to
her lover.</p>
<p>"I love you so! How brave you are! Yes, I am wholly, only
yours. But this is madness! You might be arrested and given up
to no one knows what horror, without my knowing!"</p>
<p>Gurn seemed to be hypnotised by the fierce and passionate
love of this great lady.</p>
<p>"I never gave that a thought," he murmured. "I only thought
of you!"</p>
<p>Silence fell upon these tragic lovers as they stood reading love
in one another's eyes, and recalling memories common to both,
utterly unlike as they were to outward seeming, yet linked by
the strongest bond of all, the bond of love.</p>
<p>"What happy hours we lived together out there!" Lady Beltham
whispered. Her thoughts had wandered to the far Transvaal and
the battle-field where first she had set eyes on Gurn, the sergeant
of artillery with powder-blackened face; and then to the homeward
voyage on the mighty steamer that bore them across the
blue sea, towards the dull white cliffs of England.</p>
<p>Gurn's thoughts followed hers.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_201">[201]</a></span></p>
<p>"Out there! Yes; and then on the vast ocean, on the ship
homeward bound! The quiet and peace of it all! And our meetings
every day: our long, long talks, and longer silences—in the
clear starlight of those tropical skies! We were learning to know
each other——"</p>
<p>"We were learning to love each other," she said. "And then—London,
and Paris, and all the fever of life threatening our love.
But that is the strongest thing in the world: and—do you remember?
Oh, the ecstasy of it all! But, do you remember too
what you did for me—through me—thirteen months ago?"</p>
<p>She had risen, and with white lips and haggard eyes held
Gurn's hands within her own in an even tighter grip. Emotion
choked her further utterance.</p>
<p>"Yes, I remember," Gurn went on slowly: "it was in our little
room in the rue Lévert, and I was on my knees beside you when
the door opened quietly, and there stood Lord Beltham, mad
with rage and jealousy!"</p>
<p>"I don't know what happened then," Lady Beltham whispered
in a hopeless undertone, drooping her head again.</p>
<p>"I do," muttered Gurn. "His eyes sought you, and a pistol was
pointed at your heart! He would have fired, but I sprang and
struck him down! And then I strangled him!"</p>
<p>Lady Beltham's eyes were fixed on the man's hands, that she
still held between her own.</p>
<p>"And I saw the muscles in these hands swell up beneath the
skin as they tightened on his throat!"</p>
<p>"I killed him!" groaned the man.</p>
<p>But Lady Beltham, swept by a surge of passion, sprang up and
sought his lips.</p>
<p>"Oh, Gurn!" she sobbed—"my darling!"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>"Listen," said Gurn harshly, after a pause of anxious silence.
"I had to see you to-night, for who knows if to-morrow——"
Lady Beltham shrank at the words, but Gurn went on unheeding.
"The police are after me. Of course I have made myself almost
unrecognisable, but twice just lately I have been very
nearly caught."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_202">[202]</a></span></p>
<p>"Do you think the police have any accurate idea of what happened?"
Lady Beltham asked abruptly.</p>
<p>"No," said Gurn after a moment's hesitation. "They think I
killed him with the mallet. They have not found out that I had
to strangle him. As far as I know, they found no marks of my
hands on his throat. At all events, they could not have been
clear, for his collar—you understand." The man spoke of his
crime without the least sign of remorse or repugnance now; his
only dread was lest he should be caught. "But, none the less,
they have identified me. That detective Juve is very clever."</p>
<p>"We did not have enough presence of mind," Lady Beltham
said despairingly. "We ought to have led them to suspect someone
else: have made them think that it was, say, Fantômas."</p>
<p>"Not that!" said Gurn nervously; "don't talk about Fantômas!
We did all we could. But the main thing now is that I should escape
them. I had better get away,—across the Channel,—across
the Atlantic,—anywhere. But—would you come too?"</p>
<p>Lady Beltham did not hesitate. She flung her arms around the
neck of the man who had murdered her own husband, and
yielded to a paroxysm of wild passion.</p>
<p>"You know that I am yours, wherever you may go. Shall it be
to-morrow? We can meet—you know where—and arrange
everything for your flight."</p>
<p>"My flight?" said Gurn, with reproachful emphasis on the
pronoun.</p>
<p>"For our flight," she replied, and Gurn smiled again.</p>
<p>"Then that is settled," he said. "I have seen you, and I am
happy! Good-bye."</p>
<p>He made a step towards the door, but Lady Beltham stayed
him gently.</p>
<p>"Wait," she said. "Walter shall let you out of the house. Do not
say anything: I will explain; I will invent some story to satisfy the
servants as to your coming here, and also to justify your being allowed
to go."</p>
<p>They clung to one another in a parting caress. Lady Beltham
tore herself away.</p>
<p>"Till to-morrow!" she whispered.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_203">[203]</a></span></p>
<p>She stole to the door and unlocked it noiselessly, then crossed
the room and rang the bell placed near the fireplace. Resuming
her impassive mask, and the haughty air and attitude of cold indifference
that were in such utter contrast to her real character,
she waited, while Gurn stood upright and still in the middle of
the room.</p>
<p>Walter, the porter, came in.</p>
<p>"Take that man to the door, and let no harm be done to him,"
said Lady Beltham proudly and authoritatively. "He is free."</p>
<p>Without a word, or sign, or glance, Gurn went out of the
room, and Walter followed behind him to obey his mistress's
command.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Once more alone in the great hall, Lady Beltham waited nervously
to hear the sound of the park gate closing behind Gurn.
She did not dare go on to the balcony to follow her departing
lover with her eyes. So, shaken by her recent emotions, she
stood waiting and listening, in an agony to know that he was
safe. Then, of a sudden, the noise that she had heard an hour
before broke on her ears again: the noise of hurrying feet and
broken shouts, and words, vague at first but rapidly growing
clearer. She crouched forward listening, filled with a horrible
fear, her hand laid upon her scarcely beating heart.</p>
<p>"There he is: hold him!" some one shouted. "That's him all
right! Look out, constable!"</p>
<p>"This way, Inspector! Yes, it's him, it's Gurn! Ah, would you!"</p>
<p>Paler than death, Lady Beltham cowered down upon a sofa.</p>
<p>"Good God! Good God!" she moaned. "What are they doing
to him!"</p>
<p>The uproar in the garden decreased, then voices sounded in
the corridor, Silbertown's exclamations rising above the frightened
cries of the three young girls.</p>
<p>"Gurn! Arrested! The man who murdered Lord Beltham!"
Lisbeth called out in anxious terror.</p>
<p>"But Lady Beltham? Dear God, perhaps he has murdered her
too!"</p>
<p>The door was flung open and the girls rushed in. Lady<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_204">[204]</a></span>
Beltham by a tremendous effort of will had risen to her feet, and
was standing by the end of the sofa.</p>
<p>"Lady Beltham! Alive! Yes, yes!" and Thérèse and Lisbeth and
Susannah rushed sobbing to her, and smothered her with
caresses.</p>
<p>But the agonised woman motioned them away. With hard
eyes and set mouth she moved towards the window, straining
her ears to listen. From the park outside Gurn's voice rang distinctly;
the lover wished to let his mistress know what had happened,
and to take a last farewell.</p>
<p>"I am caught, I am caught! Yes, I am Gurn, and I am caught!"</p>
<p>The fatal words were still ringing in Lady Beltham's ears
when the major-domo, Silbertown, came bursting into the
room, with radiant face and shining eyes and smiling lips, and
hurried to his mistress.</p>
<p>"I thought as much!" he exclaimed excitedly. "It was the villain
all right. I recognised him from the description, in spite of
his beard. I informed the police! As a matter of fact they have
been watching for the last two days. Just fancy, your ladyship, a
detective was shadowing Gurn—and when he was going out of
the house I gave him the signal!"</p>
<p>Lady Beltham stared at the major-domo in mute horror.</p>
<p>"Yes?" she muttered, on the point of swooning.</p>
<p>"I pointed him out to the police, and it's thanks to me, your ladyship,
that Gurn, the murderer, has been arrested at last!"</p>
<p>For just another moment Lady Beltham stared at the man
who gave her these appalling tidings, seemed to strive to utter
something, then fell prone to the floor, unconscious.</p>
<p>The major-domo and the girls sprang to her side to lavish attentions
upon her.</p>
<p>At that moment the door was pushed a little way open, and
the figure of Juve appeared.</p>
<p>"May I come in?" said he.</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_205">[205]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XXII. The Scrap of Paper</span></h2>
<p>It was three o'clock when Juve arrived at the rue Lévert, and
he found the concierge of number 147 just finishing her
coffee.</p>
<p>Amazed at the results achieved by the detective, the details of
which she had learned from the sensational articles in the daily
paper she most affected, Mme. Doulenques had conceived a
most respectful admiration for the Inspector of the Criminal
Investigation Department.</p>
<p>"That man," she constantly declared to Madame Aurore, "it
isn't eyes he has in his head, it's telescopes, magnifying glasses!
He sees everything in a minute—even when it isn't there!"</p>
<p>She gave him an admiring "good afternoon, Inspector," as he
came into her lodge, and going to a board on which numbers of
keys were hanging, took one down and handed it to him.</p>
<p>"So there's something fresh to-day?" she said. "I've just seen
in the paper that M. Gurn has been arrested. So it was my
lodger who did it? What a dreadful man! Whoever would have
thought it? It turns my blood cold to think of him!"</p>
<p>Juve was never a man for general conversation, and he was
still less interested in the garrulity of this loquacious creature.
He took the key and cut short her remarks by walking to the
door.</p>
<p>"Yes, Gurn has been arrested," he said shortly; "but he has
made no confession, so nothing is known for certain yet. Please
go on with your work exactly as though I were not in the house,
Mme. Doulenques."</p>
<p>It was his usual phrase, and a constant disappointment to the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_206">[206]</a></span>
concierge, who would have asked nothing better than to go upstairs
with the detective and watch him at his wonderful work.</p>
<p>Juve went up the five floors to the flat formerly occupied by
Gurn, reflecting somewhat moodily. Of course Gurn's arrest was
a success, and it was satisfactory to have the scoundrel under
lock and key, but in point of fact Juve had learned nothing new
in consequence of the arrest, and he was obsessed with the idea
that this murder of Lord Beltham was an altogether exceptional
crime. He did not yet know why Gurn had killed Lord Beltham,
and he did not even know exactly who Gurn himself was; all he
could declare was that the murder had been planned and carried
out with marvellous audacity and skill, and that was not
enough.</p>
<p>Juve let himself into the flat and closed the door carefully behind
him. The rooms were in disorder, the result of the searches
effected by the police. The rent had not been paid for some
time, and as no friend or relation had come forward to assume
control of Gurn's interests, the furniture and ornaments of the
little flat were to be sold by auction.</p>
<p>The detective walked through the rooms, then flung himself
into an arm-chair. He did not know precisely why he had come.
He had searched the place a dozen times already since his discovery
of the corpse within the trunk, and had found nothing
more, no tell-tale marks or fresh detail, to assist in the elucidation
of the mystery. He would have given very much to be able
to identify Gurn with some other of the many criminals who had
passed through his hands, and still more to be able to identify
him with that one most mysterious criminal whose fearful deeds
had shocked the world so greatly. Somehow the particular way
in which this murder was committed, the very audacity of it, led
him to think, to "sense," almost to swear that——</p>
<p>Juve got up. It was little in accord with his active temperament
to sit still. Once more he went all round the flat.</p>
<p>"The kitchen? Let me see: I have been through everything?
The stove? The cupboards? The saucepans? Why, I went so far
as to make sure that there was no poison in them, though it
seemed a wild idea. The anteroom? Nothing there: the um<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_207">[207]</a></span>brella
stand was empty, and the one interesting thing I did see,
the torn curtain, has been described and photographed officially."
He went back into the dining-room. "I've searched all
the furniture: and I went through all the parcels Gurn had done
up before he left, and would, no doubt, have come back for at
his leisure, had it not been for my discovery of the body, and
the unfortunate publicity the newspapers gave to that fact." In
one corner of the room was a heap of old newspapers, crumpled
and torn, and thrown down in disorder. Juve kicked them
aside. "I've looked through all that, even read the agony
columns, but there was nothing there." He went into the bedroom
and contemplated the bed, that the concierge had
stripped, the chairs set one on top of another in a corner, and
the wardrobe that stood empty, its former contents scattered on
the floor by the police during their search. There, too, nothing
was to be found.</p>
<p>Against the wall, near the fireplace, was a little escritoire with
a cupboard above it, containing a few battered books.</p>
<p>"My men have been all through that," Juve muttered; "it's
most unlikely that they missed anything, but perhaps I had better
see."</p>
<p>He sat down before it and began methodically to sort the scattered
papers; with quick, trained glance he scanned each document,
putting one after another aside with a grimace expressive
of disappointment. Almost the last document he picked up was
a long sheet of parchment, and as he unfolded it an exclamation
escaped his lips. It was an official notice of Gurn's promotion to
the rank of sergeant when fighting under Lord Beltham in the
South African War. Juve read it through—he knew English
well—and laid it down with a gesture of discouragement.</p>
<p>"It is extraordinary," he muttered. "That seems to be perfectly
authentic; it is authentic, and it proves that this fellow was a decent
fellow and a brave soldier once; that is a fine record of service."
He drummed his fingers on the desk and spoke aloud. "Is
Gurn really Gurn, then, and have I been mistaken from start to
finish in the little romance I have been weaving round him?
How am I to find the key to the mystery? How am I to prove the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_208">[208]</a></span>
truth of what I feel to be so very close to me, but which eludes
me every time, just as I seem to be about to grasp it?"</p>
<p>He went on with his search, and then, looking at the bookcase,
took the volumes out and, holding each by its two covers,
shook it to make sure that no papers were hidden among the
leaves. But all in vain. He did the same with a large railway time-table
and several shipping calendars.</p>
<p>"The odd thing is," he thought, "that all these time-tables go
to prove that Gurn really was the commercial traveller he professed
to be. It's exactly things such as these one would expect
to find in the possession of a man who travelled much, and always
had to be referring to the dates of sailing to distant parts of
the world."</p>
<p>In the bookcase was a box, made to represent a bound book,
and containing a collection of ordnance maps. Juve took them
out to make sure that no loose papers were included among
them, and one by one unfolded every map.</p>
<p>Then a sharp exclamation burst from his lips.</p>
<p>"Good Lord! Now there——"</p>
<p>In his surprise he sprang up so abruptly that he pushed back
his chair, and overturned it. His excitement was so great that his
hands were shaking as he carefully spread out upon the desk
one of the ordnance maps he had taken from the case.</p>
<p>"It's the map of the centre district all right: the map which
shows Cahors, and Brives, and Saint-Jaury and—Beaulieu! And
the missing piece—it is the missing piece that would give that
precise district!"</p>
<p>Juve stared at the map with hypnotised gaze; for a piece had
been cut out of it, cut out with a penknife neatly and carefully,
and that piece must have shown the exact district where the
château stood which had been occupied by the Marquise de
Langrune.</p>
<p>"Oh, if I could only prove it: prove that the piece missing
from this map, this map belonging to Gurn, is really and truly
the piece I found near Verrières Station just after the murder of
the Marquise de Langrune—what a triumph that would be!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_209">[209]</a></span>
What a damning proof! What astounding consequences this discovery
of mine might have!"</p>
<p>Juve made a careful note of the number of the map, quickly
and nervously, folded it up again, and prepared to leave the flat.</p>
<p>He had made but a step or two towards the door when a sharp
ring at the bell made him jump.</p>
<p>"The deuce!" he exclaimed softly; "who can be coming to ring
Gurn up when everybody in Paris knows he has been arrested?"
and he felt mechanically in his pocket to make sure that his revolver
was there. Then he smiled. "What a fool I am! Of course
it is only Mme. Doulenques, wondering why I am staying here
so long."</p>
<p>He strode to the door, flung it wide open, and then recoiled
in astonishment.</p>
<p>"You?" he exclaimed, surveying the caller from top to toe.
"You? Charles Rambert! Or, I should say, Jérôme Fandor! Now
what the deuce does this mean?"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_210">[210]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XXIII. The Wreck of the "Lancaster"</span></h2>
<p>Jérôme Fandor entered the room without a word. Juve closed
the door behind him. The boy was very pale and manifestly
much upset.</p>
<p>"What is the matter?" said Juve.</p>
<p>"Something terrible has happened," the boy answered. "I
have just heard awful news: my poor father is dead!"</p>
<p>"What?" Juve exclaimed sharply. "M. Etienne Rambert
dead?"</p>
<p>Jérôme Fandor put a newspaper into the detective's hand.
"Read that," he said, and pointed to an article on the front page
with a huge head-line: "<i>Wreck of the 'Lancaster': 150 Lives
Lost.</i>" There were tears in his eyes, and he had such obvious difficulty
in restraining his grief, that Juve saw that to read the article
would be the speediest way to find out what had occurred.</p>
<p>The Red Star liner <i>Lancaster</i>, plying between Caracas and
Southampton, had gone down with all hands the night before,
just off the Isle of Wight, and at the moment of going to press
only one person was known to have been saved. There was a
good sea running, but it was by no means rough, and the vessel
was still within sight of the lighthouse and making for the open
sea at full speed, when the lighthousemen suddenly saw her literally
blown into the air and then disappear beneath the waves.
The alarm was given immediately and boats of all kinds put off
to the scene of the disaster, but though a great deal of wreckage
was still floating about, only one man of the crew was seen,
clinging to a spar; he was picked up by the <i>Campbell</i> and taken
to hospital, where he was interviewed by <i>The Times</i>, without,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_211">[211]</a></span>
however, being able to throw any light upon what was an almost
unprecedented catastrophe in the history of the sea. All he
could say was that the liner had just got up full speed and was
making a perfectly normal beginning of her trip, when suddenly
a tremendous explosion occurred. He himself was engaged at
the moment fastening the tarpaulins over the baggage hold, and
he was confident that the explosion occurred among the cargo.
But he could give absolutely no more information: the entire
ship seemed to be riven asunder, and he was thrown into the
sea, stunned, and knew no more until he recovered consciousness
and found himself aboard the <i>Campbell</i>.</p>
<p>"It's quite incomprehensible," Juve muttered; "surely there
can't have been any powder aboard? No explosives are carried
on these great liners; they only take passengers and the mails."
He scanned the list of passengers. "Etienne Rambert's name is
given among the first-class passengers, right enough," he said.
"Well, it's odd!"</p>
<p>Jérôme Fandor heaved a profound sigh.</p>
<p>"It is a fatality which I shall never get over," he said. "When
you told me the other day that you knew I was innocent, I ought
to have gone to see my father, in spite of what you said. I am
sure he would have believed me and come to see you; then you
could have convinced him, and I should not have this horrible
grief of remembering that he had died without learning that his
son was not a bad man, but was quite deserving of his affection."</p>
<p>Jérôme Fandor was making a brave struggle to maintain his
self-control, and Juve looked at him without concealing the real
sympathy he felt for him in his grief. He put his hand kindly on
his shoulder.</p>
<p>"Listen, my dear boy; odd as you may think it, you can take
my word for it that there is no need for you to despair; there is
nothing to prove that your father is dead; he may not have been
on board."</p>
<p>The boy looked up in surprise.</p>
<p>"What do you mean, Juve?"</p>
<p>"I don't want to say anything, my boy, except that you would
be very wrong to give way to distress at present. If you have any<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_212">[212]</a></span>
confidence in me, you may believe me when I say that. There is
nothing yet to prove that you have had this loss: and, besides,
you still have your mother, who is perfectly sure to get quite
well: do you understand?—<i>perfectly sure!</i>" He changed the subject
abruptly. "There is one thing I should like to know: what the
dickens brought you here?"</p>
<p>"You were the first person I thought of in my trouble,"
Fandor replied. "Directly I read about the disaster in that paper
I came to tell you at once."</p>
<p>"Yes, I quite understand that," Juve answered. "What I do not
understand is how you guessed that you would find me here, in
Gurn's flat."</p>
<p>The question seemed to perturb the boy.</p>
<p>"It—it was quite by chance," he stammered.</p>
<p>"That is the kind of explanation one offers to fools," Juve retorted.
"By what chance did you see me come into this house?
What the deuce were you doing in the rue Lévert?" The lad
showed some inclination to make for the door, but Juve stayed
him peremptorily. "Answer my question, please: how did you
know I was here?"</p>
<p>Driven into a corner, the boy blurted out the truth:</p>
<p>"I had followed you."</p>
<p>"Followed me?" Juve exclaimed. "Where from?"</p>
<p>"From your rooms."</p>
<p>"You mean, and you may as well own up to it at once, that you
were shadowing me."</p>
<p>"Well, yes, M. Juve, it is true," Fandor confessed, all in one
breath. "I was shadowing you: I do every day!"</p>
<p>Juve was dumbfounded.</p>
<p>"Every day? And I never saw you! Gad, you are jolly clever!
And may I enquire why you have been exercising this supervision
over me?"</p>
<p>Jérôme Fandor hung his head.</p>
<p>"Forgive me," he faltered; "I have been very stupid. I thought
you—I thought you were—Fantômas!"</p>
<p>The idea tickled the detective so much that he dropped back
into a chair to laugh at his ease.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_213">[213]</a></span></p>
<p>"'Pon my word," he said, "you have an imagination! And what
made you suppose that I was Fantômas?"</p>
<p>"M. Juve," Fandor said earnestly, "I made a vow that I would
find out the truth, and discover the scoundrel who has made
such awful havoc of my life. But I did not know where to begin.
From all you have said I realised that Fantômas was a most extraordinarily
clever man; I did not know anyone who could be
cleverer than you; and so I watched you! It was merely logical!"</p>
<p>Far from being angry, Juve was rather flattered.</p>
<p>"I am amazed by what you have just told me, my boy," he said
with a smile. "In the first place your reasoning is not at all bad.
Of course it is obvious that I cannot suspect myself of being
Fantômas, but I quite admit that if I were in your place I might
make the supposition, wild as it may seem. And, in the next
place, you have shadowed me without my becoming aware of
the fact, and that is very good indeed: a proof that you are uncommonly
smart." He looked at the lad attentively for a few moments,
and then went on more gravely: "Are you satisfied now
that your hypothesis was wrong? Or do you still suspect me?"</p>
<p>"No, I don't suspect you now," Fandor declared; "not since I
saw you come into this house; Fantômas certainly would not
have come to search Gurn's rooms because——"</p>
<p>He stopped, and Juve, who was looking at him keenly, did not
make him finish what he was saying.</p>
<p>"Shall I tell you something?" he said at last. "If you continue
to display as much thought and initiative in the career you have
chosen as you have just displayed, you will very soon be the first
newspaper detective of the day!" He jumped up and led the boy
off. "Come along: I've got to go to the Law Courts at once."</p>
<p>"You've found out something fresh?"</p>
<p>"I'm going to ask them to call an interesting witness in the
Gurn affair."</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Rain had been falling heavily all the morning and afternoon,
but within the last few minutes it had almost stopped. Dollon,
the steward, put his hand out of the window and found that only
a few drops were falling now from the heavy grey sky.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_214">[214]</a></span></p>
<p>He was an invaluable servant, and a few months after the
death of the Marquise de Langrune, the Baronne de Vibray had
gladly offered him a situation, and a cottage on her estate at
Querelles.</p>
<p>He walked across the room, and called his son.</p>
<p>"Jacques, would you like to come with me? I am going down
to the river to see that the sluices have been opened properly.
The banks are anything but sound, and these rains will flood us
out one of these days."</p>
<p>The steward and his son went down the garden towards the
stream which formed one boundary of Mme. de Vibray's park.</p>
<p>"Look, father," Jacques exclaimed, "the postman is calling us."</p>
<p>The postman, a crusty but good-hearted fellow, came hurrying
up to the steward.</p>
<p>"You do make me run, M. Dollon," he complained. "I went to
your house this morning to take you a letter, but you weren't
there."</p>
<p>"You might have left it with anybody."</p>
<p>"Excuse me!" the man retorted; "it's against the regulations:
I've got an official letter for you, and I can only give it to you
yourself," and he held out an envelope which Dollon tore open.</p>
<p>"Magistrates' office?" he said enquiringly, as he glanced at the
heading of the notepaper. "Who can be writing to me from the
Law Courts?" He read the letter aloud:</p>
<p>"Sir: As time does not permit of a regular summons being
sent to you by an usher of the court, I beg you to be so good as
to come to Paris immediately, the day after to-morrow if possible,
and attend at my office, where your depositions are absolutely
required to conclude a case in which you are interested.
Please bring, without exception, all the papers and documents
entrusted to you by the Clerk of Assizes at Cahors, at the conclusion
of the Langrune enquiry."</p>
<p>"It is signed Germain Fuselier," Dollon remarked. "I've often
seen his name in the papers. He is a very well-known magistrate,
and is employed in many criminal cases." He read the letter
through once more, and turned to the postman. "Will you take
a glass of wine, Muller?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_215">[215]</a></span></p>
<p>"That's a thing I never say 'no' to."</p>
<p>"Well, go into the house with Jacques, and while he is attending
to you I will write a reply telegram which you can take to the
office for me."</p>
<p>While the man was quenching his thirst Dollon wrote his
reply:</p>
<p>"Will leave Verrières to-morrow evening by 7.20 train, arriving
Paris 5 <span class="smcap">a.m.</span> Wire appointment at your office to me at Hôtel
Francs-Bourgeois, 152 rue du Bac."</p>
<p>He read the message over, signed it "Dollon" and considered.</p>
<p>"I wonder what they can want me for? Oh, if only they have
found out something about the Langrune affair, how glad I shall
be!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_216">[216]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XXIV. Under Lock and Key</span></h2>
<p>After the preliminary examination as to his identity and so on,
Gurn had been transferred to the Santé prison. At first the
prisoner seemed to have terrible difficulty in accustoming himself
to the rigours of confinement; he suffered from alternate
paroxysms of rage and despair, but by sheer strength of character
he fought these down. As a prisoner on remand he was
entitled to the privilege of a separate cell, also during the first
forty-eight hours he had been able to have his meals sent in
from outside. Since then, however, his money had given out,
and he was obliged to content himself with the ordinary prison
dietary. But Gurn was not fastidious; this man whom Lady
Beltham had singled out, or accepted, as her lover had often
given proofs of an education and an intelligence above the average,
yet now he appeared quite at ease in the atmosphere of a
prison.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Gurn was walking quickly and alone round the exercise yard,
when a breathless voice sounded in his ear.</p>
<p>"'Gad, Gurn, you know how to march! I was going to join you
for a bit, but I could not keep up with you."</p>
<p>Gurn turned and saw old Siegenthal, the warder in charge of
his division, in whose custody he was particularly placed.</p>
<p>"My word!" the old fellow panted, "anybody could tell you
had been in the infantry. Well, so have I; though that wasn't yesterday,
nor yet the day before; but we never marched as fast as
you do. We made a fine march once though—at Saint-Privat."</p>
<p>Out of pity for the decent old fellow Gurn slackened his pace.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_217">[217]</a></span>
He had heard the story of the battle of Saint-Privat a dozen
times already, but he was quite willing to let Siegenthal tell it
again. The warder, however, wandered to another point.</p>
<p>"By the way, I heard you were promoted sergeant out in the
Transvaal: is that so?" and as Gurn nodded assent, he went on:
"I never rose above the rank of corporal, but at any rate I have
always led an honest life." A sudden compassion for his prisoner
seized the old man, and he laid a kindly hand on Gurn's shoulder.
"Is it really possible that an old soldier like you, who seem
to be such a steady, serious, kind of man, can have committed
such a crime?"</p>
<p>Gurn dropped his eyes and did not reply.</p>
<p>"I suppose there was a woman at the bottom of it?" Siegenthal
said tentatively. "You acted on impulse, in a fit of jealousy, eh?"</p>
<p>"No," Gurn answered with sudden bluntness, "I may as well
own up that I did it in anger, because I wanted money—for the
sake of robbery."</p>
<p>"I'm sorry," said the old warder simply. "You must have been
desperately hard up."</p>
<p>"No I wasn't."</p>
<p>Siegenthal stared at his prisoner. The man must be utterly
callous to talk like that, he thought. Then a clock struck and the
warder gave a curt order.</p>
<p>"Time, Gurn! We must go back," and he conducted the unresisting
prisoner up the three flights of stairs that led to the division
in which his cell was. "By the way," he remarked as they
went, "I forgot to tell you that you and I have got to part."</p>
<p>"Oh?" said Gurn. "Am I to be transferred to another prison?"</p>
<p>"No, it's I who am going. Just fancy, I have been appointed
head warder at Poissy; I go on leave to-night, and take up my
new post in a week." Both halted before the door of cell number
127. "In with you," said Siegenthal, and when Gurn had
obeyed he turned to go. Then he wheeled round again quickly,
and put out his hand hurriedly, as if half afraid of being seen.
"Put it there, Gurn," he said; "no doubt you are a murderer and,
as you have confessed yourself, a thief; but I can't forget that if
you had kept straight, you were the sergeant and I should have<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_218">[218]</a></span>
had to obey you. I'm sorry for you!" Gurn was touched and murmured
a word of thanks. "That's all right, that's all right,"
Siegenthal muttered, not attempting to hide his emotion; "let us
hope that everything will turn out well," and he left Gurn alone
in the cell to his meditations.</p>
<p>Twice, Gurn reflected, relying on the sympathy which he
knew he had evoked in the old warder's heart despite the number
of criminals who had passed through his hands, he had been
on the point of broaching a serious and delicate matter to him;
but he had not actually spoken, being deterred by some undefinable
scruple, as well as half suspecting that his application
would be made in vain. And now he was glad he had been so
cautious, for even if the warder had been amenable, his approaching
removal to another prison would have prevented the
idea from coming to fruition.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>A sing-song voice echoed in the corridor.</p>
<p>"Number 127, you are wanted in the barristers' room. Get
ready," and the next minute the door of the cell was thrown
open, and a cheery-looking warder, with a strong Gascon accent,
appeared. Gurn had noticed him before: he was the second
warder in this division, a man named Nibet, and no doubt he
would be promoted to Siegenthal's place when the chief warder
left. Nibet looked curiously at Gurn, a certain sympathy in his
quick brown eyes. "Ready, Gurn?"</p>
<p>Gurn growled an answer and pulled on his coat again. His
counsel was Maître Barberoux, one of the foremost criminal
barristers of the day; Gurn had thought it prudent to retain him
for his defence, more especially as it would cost him nothing
personally. But he had no particular desire to talk to him now;
he had already told him everything he intended to tell him, and
he had no intention of allowing the case to be boomed as a sensation;
quite the reverse indeed: in his opinion, the flatter the
case fell, the better it would be for his interests, though
no doubt Maître Barberoux would not be of the same way of
thinking.</p>
<p>But he said nothing, and merely walked in front of Nibet<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_219">[219]</a></span>
along the corridor towards the barristers' room, the way to
which he was already familiar with. On the way they passed
some masons who were at work in the prison, and these men
stopped to watch him pass, but contrary to Gurn's apprehensions
they did not seem to recognise him. He hoped it meant
that the murder was already ceasing to be a nine days' wonder
for the public at large.</p>
<p>Nibet pushed Gurn into the barristers' room, saying respectfully
to the person in it already, "You only have to ring, sir, when
you have finished," and then withdrew, leaving Gurn in presence,
not of his counsel as he had expected, but of that personage's
assistant, a young licentiate in law named Roger de Seras,
who was also a most incredible dandy.</p>
<p>Roger de Seras greeted Gurn with an engaging smile and advanced
as if to shake hands with him, but suddenly wondering
whether that action might not suggest undue familiarity, he
raised his hand to his own head instead and scratched it; the
young fellow was still younger in his business, and did not rightly
know whether it was etiquette for a barrister, or even a barrister's
junior, to shake hands with a prisoner who was implicated
in a notorious murder.</p>
<p>Gurn felt inclined to laugh, and on the whole was glad that it
was the junior whom he had to see; the futile verbosity of this
very young licentiate might possibly be amusing.</p>
<p>Maître Roger de Seras began with civil apologies.</p>
<p>"You will excuse me if I only stay for a few minutes, but I am
most frightfully busy; besides, two ladies are waiting for me outside
in my carriage: I may say confidentially that they are
actresses, old friends of mine, and, just fancy, they are most
frightfully anxious to see you! That's what it means to be famous,
M. Gurn; eh, what?" Gurn nodded, not feeling unduly flattered.
Roger de Seras continued. "Just to please them I have made any
number of applications to the governor of the prison, but there
was nothing doing, my dear chap; that beast of a magistrate,
Fuselier, insists on your being kept in absolute seclusion. But
none the less, I've got some news for you. I know heaps: why,
my friends at the Law Courts call me 'the peripatetic para<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_220">[220]</a></span>graph!'
Not bad, eh, what?" Gurn smiled and Roger de Seras
was encouraged. "It's given me no end of a boom, my leader acting
for you, and my being able to come and see you whenever I
like! Everybody asks me how you are, and what you are like, and
what you say, and what you think. You can congratulate yourself
on having caused a sensation in Paris."</p>
<p>Gurn began to be irritated by all this chatter.</p>
<p>"I must confess I'm not the least interested in what people
are saying about me. Is there anything new in my case?"</p>
<p>"Absolutely nothing that I am aware of," Roger de Seras
replied serenely, without stopping to think whether there was or
not. "I say—Lady Beltham——"</p>
<p>"Yes?" said Gurn.</p>
<p>"Well, I know her very well, you know: I go out a frightful lot
and I have often met her: a charming woman, Lady Beltham!"</p>
<p>Gurn really did not know how to treat the idiot. Never one to
suffer fools gladly, he grew irritable and would almost certainly
have said something that would have put the garrulous young
bungler in his place, had not the latter suddenly remembered
something, just as he was on the point of getting up to go.</p>
<p>"Oh, by the way," he said with a laugh, "I was nearly forgetting
the most important thing of all. Just fancy, that beast Juve, the
marvellous detective whom the newspapers rave about, went to
your place yesterday afternoon to make another official search!"</p>
<p>"Alone?" enquired Gurn, much interested.</p>
<p>"Quite alone. Now what do you suppose he found; the place
has been ransacked dozens of times, you know; of course I mean
something sensational in the way of a find. I bet you a thousand——"</p>
<p>"I never bet," Gurn snapped. "Tell me at once what it was."</p>
<p>The young fellow was proud of having caught the attention of
his leader's notorious client, if only for a moment; he paused and
wagged his head, weighing each word to give them greater
emphasis.</p>
<p>"He found an ordnance map in your bookcase, my dear
chap—an ordnance map with a bit torn out of it."</p>
<p>"Oh! And what then?" said Gurn, a frown upon his face.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_221">[221]</a></span></p>
<p>The young barrister did not notice the expression on the murderer's
countenance.</p>
<p>"Well, then it appears that Juve thought it was very important.
Between you and me, my opinion is that Juve tries to be frightfully
clever and succeeds in looking a fool. How, I ask you, can
the discovery of that map affect your case or influence the decision
of the jury? By the way, there is no need for you to worry
about the result; I have had a frightful lot of experience in criminal
cases, and so be assured you are all right: extenuating circumstances,
you know. But—oh, yes, there is one thing more I
wanted to tell you. A fresh witness is going to be called at the examination;
let me see, what's his name? Dollon: that's it: the
steward, Dollon."</p>
<p>"I don't understand," said Gurn; his head was bent and his
eyes cast down.</p>
<p>A glimmer of light dawned in the young licentiate's brain.</p>
<p>"Wait, there is some connection," he said. "The steward,
Dollon, is in the employment of a lady who calls herself the
Baronne de Vibray. And the Baronne de Vibray is guardian to
the young lady who was staying with Lady Beltham the day, or
rather the night, when you—you—well, you know. And that
young lady, Mlle. Thérèse Auvernois, was placed with Lady
Beltham by M. Etienne Rambert. And M. Etienne Rambert is
the father of the young man who murdered the Marquise de
Langrune last year. I tell you all these things without attempting
to draw any deductions from them, for, for my own part, I
haven't the least idea why the steward, Dollon, has been summoned
in our case at all."</p>
<p>"Nor have I," said Gurn, and the frown on his brow was
deeper.</p>
<p>Roger de Seras hunted all round the little room for his gloves
and found them in his pocket.</p>
<p>"Well, my dear chap, I must leave you. We have been chatting
for a whole half-hour, and those ladies are still waiting for me.
What on earth will they say to me?"</p>
<p>He was about to ring for the warder when Gurn abruptly
stayed him.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_222">[222]</a></span></p>
<p>"Tell me," he said with a sudden air of interest, "when is that
man coming—what's his name? Dollon?"</p>
<p>The young barrister was on the point of saying he did not
know, when a brilliant recollection came into his mind.</p>
<p>"'Gad, how frightfully stupid I am! Why, I have a copy of the
telegram he sent the magistrate in my portfolio here now." He
opened the portfolio and picked out a sheet of blue paper.
"Here it is."</p>
<p>Gurn took it from him and read:</p>
<p>"Will leave Verrières to-morrow evening by 7.20 train, arriving
Paris 5 <span class="smcap">a.m.</span>..."</p>
<p>Gurn appeared to be sufficiently edified: at all events he paid
no attention to the rest of the message. Lord Beltham's murderer
handed the document back to the barrister without a
word.</p>
<p>A few minutes later Maître Roger de Seras had rejoined his
lady friends, and the prisoner was once more in his cell.</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_223">[223]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XXV. An Unexpected Accomplice</span></h2>
<p>Gurn was walking nervously up and down in his cell after this
interview, when the door was pushed open and the cheery
face of the warder Nibet looked in.</p>
<p>"Evening, Gurn," he said; "it's six o'clock, and the restaurant-keeper
opposite wants to know if he is to send your dinner in to
you."</p>
<p>"No," Gurn growled. "I'll have the prison ordinary."</p>
<p>"Oh—ho!" said the warder; "funds low, eh? Of course, it's not
for you to despise our dietary, but still, Government beans——"
He came further into the cell, ignoring Gurn's impatient preference
for his room to his company, and said in a low tone:
"There, take that," and thrust a bank-note into the hand of the
dumbfounded prisoner. "And if you want any more, they will be
forthcoming," he added. He made a sign to Gurn to say nothing,
and went to the door. "I'll be back in a few minutes: I'll just go
and order a decent dinner for you."</p>
<p>Gurn felt as if a tremendous weight had been lifted from him;
the cell seemed larger, the prison walls less high; he had an intuition
that Lady Beltham was not deserting him. He had never
doubted the sincerity of her feelings for him, but he quite realised
how a woman in her delicate position might feel embarrassed
in trying to intervene in favour of any prisoner, and much
more so in the case of the one whom the entire world believed
to be the single-handed murderer of her husband. But now
Lady Beltham had intervened. She had succeeded in communicating
with him through the medium of this warder. And almost
certainly she would do much more yet.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>The door opened again, and the warder entered, carrying a
long rush basket containing several dishes and a bottle of wine.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_224">[224]</a></span></p>
<p>"Well, Gurn, that's a more agreeable sort of dinner, eh?"</p>
<p>"Gad, I wanted it after all," said the murderer with a smile.
"It was a good idea of yours, M. Nibet, to insist on my getting
my dinner sent in from outside."</p>
<p>Nibet winked; he appreciated his prisoner's tact; obviously he
was not one to make untimely allusions to the warder's breach
of discipline in conveying money to him so simply, but so very
irregularly.</p>
<p>As he ate Gurn chatted with Nibet.</p>
<p>"I suppose it is you who will get Siegenthal's place?"</p>
<p>"Yes," said Nibet, sipping the wine Gurn had offered him. "I
have asked for the berth no end of times, but it never came; I
was always told to wait because the place was not free, and another
berth must be found first for Siegenthal, who was my senior.
But the old beast would never make any application.
However, three days ago, I was sent for to the Ministry, and one
of the staff told me that some one in the Embassy, or the
Government, or somewhere, was taking an interest in me, and
they asked me a lot of questions and I told them all about it. And
then, all of a sudden, Siegenthal was promoted to Poissy and I
was given his billet here."</p>
<p>Gurn nodded: he saw light.</p>
<p>"And what about the money?"</p>
<p>"That's stranger still, but I understood all the same. A lady met
me in the street the other night and spoke to me by name. We
had a chat there on the pavement, for the street was empty, and
she shoved some bank-notes in my hand—not just one or two,
but a great bunch——, and she told me that she was interested
in me—in you——, and that if things turned out as she wished
there were plenty more bank-notes where those came from."</p>
<p>While the warder was talking Gurn watched him carefully.
The murderer was an experienced reader of character in faces,
and he speedily realised that his lady's choice had fallen on an
excellent object. Thick lips, a narrow forehead, and prominent
cheek-bones suggested a material nature that would hesitate at
nothing which would satisfy his carnal appetites, so Gurn decided
that further circumlocution was so much waste of time,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_225">[225]</a></span>
and that he might safely come to the point. He laid his hand familiarly
on the warder's shoulder.</p>
<p>"I'm getting sick of being here," he remarked.</p>
<p>"I dare say," the warder answered uneasily; "but you must be
guided by reason; time is going on, and things arrange themselves."</p>
<p>"They do when you help them," Gurn said peremptorily; "and
you and I are going to help them."</p>
<p>"That remains to be seen," said the warder.</p>
<p>"Of course, everything has got to be paid for," Gurn went on.
"One can't expect a warder to risk his situation merely to help a
prisoner to escape." He smiled as the warder made an exclamation
of nervous warning. "Don't be frightened, Nibet. We're not
going to play any fool games, but let us talk seriously. Of course
you have another appointment with the worthy lady who gave
you that money?"</p>
<p>"I am to meet her to-night at eleven, in the boulevard Arago,"
Nibet said, after a moment's hesitation.</p>
<p>"Good," said Gurn. "Well, you are to tell her that I must have
ten thousand francs."</p>
<p>"What?" exclaimed the man, in utter astonishment, but his
eyes shone with greed.</p>
<p>"Ten thousand francs," Gurn repeated calmly, "and by to-morrow
morning. Fifteen hundred of those are for you; I will go
away to-morrow evening."</p>
<p>There was a tense silence; the warder seemed doubtful, and
Gurn turned the whole of his will power upon him to persuade
him.</p>
<p>"Suppose they suspect me?" said Nibet.</p>
<p>"Idiot!" Gurn retorted; "all you will do will be to make a slip
in your duty: I don't want you to be an accomplice. Listen: there
will be another five thousand francs for you, and if things turn
out awkwardly for you, all you will have to do will be to go across
to England, and live there comfortably for the rest of your days."</p>
<p>The warder was obviously almost ready to comply.</p>
<p>"Who will guarantee me?" he asked.</p>
<p>"The lady, I tell you—the lady of the boulevard Arago. Here,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_226">[226]</a></span>
give her this," and he tore a leaf out of his pocket-book and,
scribbling a few words on it, handed it to Nibet.</p>
<p>"Well," said the warder hesitatingly: "I don't say 'no.'"</p>
<p>"You've got to say 'yes,'" Gurn retorted.</p>
<p>The two looked steadily in each other's eyes; then the warder
blenched.</p>
<p>"Yes," he said.</p>
<p>Nibet was going away, and was already almost in the corridor
when Gurn calmly called him back.</p>
<p>"You will evolve a plan, and I will start to-morrow. Don't forget
to bring me a time-table; the Orleans Company time-table
will do."</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>The murderer was not disappointed in his expectations. The
next morning Nibet appeared with a mysterious face and eager
eyes. He took a small bundle from underneath his jersey and
gave it to Gurn.</p>
<p>"Hide that in your bed," he said, and Gurn obeyed.</p>
<p>The morning passed without further developments; numerous
warders came and went in the corridor, attending to the
prisoners, and Gurn could get no private talk with Nibet, who
contrived, however, to come into his cell several times on various
pretexts and assure him with a nod or a word that all was
going well. But presently, when walking in the exercise yard, the
two men were able to have a conversation.</p>
<p>Nibet manifested an intelligence of which his outer appearance
gave no indication; but it seems to be an established fact
that the inventive faculties, even of men of inferior mental quality,
are sharpened when they are engaged in mischief.</p>
<p>"For the last three weeks," he said, "about a score of masons
have been working in the prison, repairing the roof and doing
up some of the cells. Cell number 129, the one next yours, is
empty, and there are no bars on the window; the masons go
through that cell and that window to get on to the roof. They
knock off work soon after six o'clock. The gate-keeper knows
them all, but he does not always look closely at their faces when
they go by, and you might perhaps be able to go out with them.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_227">[227]</a></span></p>
<p>"In the bundle that I gave you there is a pair of workman's
trousers, and a waistcoat and a felt hat; put those on. At about a
quarter to six, the men who went up on to the roof through the
cell, come down by way of the skylights to the staircase that
leads to the clerk's office, pass the office, where they are asked
no questions, cross the two yards and go out by the main gate. I
will open the door of your cell a few minutes before six, and you
must go into the empty cell next yours, slip up on to the roof and
take care to hide behind the chimney stacks until the men have
done work. Let them go down in front of you, and follow behind
with a pick or a shovel on your shoulder, and when you are passing
the clerk, or anywhere where you might be observed, mind
you let the men go a yard or two in front of you. When the gate
is just being shut after the last workman, call out quietly, but as
naturally as you can, 'Hold on, M. Morin; mind you don't lock
me in; I'm not one of your lodgers; let me out after my mates.'
Make some joke of that sort, and when you are once outside the
gate, by George, my boy, you'll have to vamoose!"</p>
<p>Gurn listened attentively to the warder's instructions. Lady
Beltham must, indeed, have been generous and have made the
man perfectly easy on the score of his own future.</p>
<p>"In one of the pockets of the clothes," Nibet went on, "I have
put ten hundred-franc notes; you asked for more, but I could
not raise it: we can settle that some other time."</p>
<p>Gurn made no comment.</p>
<p>"When will my escape be discovered?" he asked.</p>
<p>"I am on night duty," the warder answered. "Arrange your
clothes on your bed to make it look as if you were in bed, and
then they will think I might have been deceived. I go off duty at
five; the next round is at eight. My mate will open the door of
the cage, and by that time you will be miles away."</p>
<p>Gurn nodded comprehension. Time did not permit of longer
conversation. The bell had rung some minutes ago, proclaiming
that the exercise time was over. The two men hurried upstairs to
cell number 127 on the third floor, and the prisoner was locked
in alone, while Nibet went about his duty as usual.</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_228">[228]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XXVI. A Mysterious Crime</span></h2>
<p>Arriving in good time at the little station at Verrières, where
he was about to take a train to Paris to keep his appointment
at the Law Courts, the old steward Dollon gave his parting
instructions to his two children, who had come to see him
off.</p>
<p>"I must, of course, call upon Mme. de Vibray," he said, "and
I don't yet know what time M. Fuselier wants to see me at his
office. Anyhow, if I don't come back to-morrow, I will the next
day, without fail. Well, little ones, I'm just off now, so say good-bye
and get home as fast as you can. It looks to me as if there
was going to be a storm, and I should like to know that you were
safe at home."</p>
<p>With heavy creaking of iron wheels, and hoarse blowing off of
steam from the engine, the Paris train drew into the station. The
steward gave a final kiss to his little son and daughter and got
into a second-class carriage.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>In a neighbouring village a clock had just struck three.</p>
<p>The storm had been raging since early in the evening, but
now it seemed informed with a fresh fury: the rain was lashing
down more fiercely, and the wind was blowing harder still, making
the slender poplars along the railway line bow and bend before
the squalls and assume the most fantastic shapes, but
vaguely shown against the night. The night was inky black. The
keenest eye could make out nothing at all distinctly, even at the
distance of a few yards: the darkness was so dense as to seem absolutely
solid.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_229">[229]</a></span></p>
<p>Nevertheless, along the railway embankment, a man was
making his way with steady step, seeming not a whit disturbed
by the tragic horror of the storm.</p>
<p>He was a man of about thirty, rather well dressed in a large
waterproof coat, the collar of which, turned up to his ears, hid
the lower part of his face, and a big felt hat with brim turned
down protecting him fairly well from the worst of the weather.
The man fought his way against the wind, which drove into his
overcoat with such force that sometimes it almost stopped his
progress, and he trod the stony track without paying heed to the
sorry plight into which it would most surely put the thin boots
he was wearing.</p>
<p>"Awful weather!" he growled: "I don't remember such a
shocking night for years: wind, rain, every conceivable thing! But
I mustn't grumble, for the total absence of moon will be uncommonly
useful for my purpose." A flash of lightning streaked the
horizon, and the man stopped and looked quickly about him. "I
can't be far from the place," he thought, and again went on his
way. Presently he heaved a sigh of relief. "Here I am at last."</p>
<p>At this spot the line was completely enclosed between two
high slopes, or ran at the bottom of a deep cutting.</p>
<p>"It's better here," the man said to himself; "the wind passes
well above my head, and the cutting gives good shelter." He
stopped and carefully deposited on the ground a rather bulky
bundle he had been carrying under his arm; then he began to
pace up and down, stamping his feet in an effort to keep warm.
"It has just struck three," he muttered. "From the time-table I
can't expect anything for another ten minutes. Well, better too
soon than too late!" He contemplated the bundle which he had
laid down a few minutes before. "It's heavier than I thought, and
deucedly in the way. But it was absolutely necessary to bring it.
And down here in this cutting, there is nothing for me to be anxious
about: the grass is thick, so I can run, and the line is so
straight that I shall see the lights of the train a long way off." A
thin smile curled his lips. "Who would have thought, when I was
in America, that I should ever find it so useful to have learnt
how to jump a train?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_230">[230]</a></span></p>
<p>A dull sound in the distance caught his ear. In a second he had
sprung to his bundle, picked it up, and, choosing a spot on the
ballast, crouched down listening. At the place where he stood
the line ran up a steep acclivity. It was from the lower end of this
that the noise he had heard proceeded, and now was growing
louder, almost deafening. It was the heavy, regular puffing of a
powerful engine coming up a steep gradient, under full steam.</p>
<p>"No mistake: my star is with me!" the man muttered, and as
the train approached he stretched his muscles and, taking a
firmer grip of his bundle, he bent forward in the stooping attitude
that runners take when about to start off in a race.</p>
<p>With a heavy roar, and enveloped in clouds of steam, the train
came up to where he was, travelling slowly because of the steep
gradient, certainly less than twenty miles an hour. The moment
the engine had passed him, the man started off, lithe as a cat,
and ran at the top of his speed. The train, of course, gained upon
him; the tender, luggage vans, and third-class carriages passed
him, and a second-class carriage was just coming up with him.
The pace alone would have deprived almost anyone else of
power of thought, but this man was evidently a first-rate athlete,
for the moment he caught sight of the second-class carriage he
took his decision. With a tremendous effort he caught hold of
the hand-rail and sprang upon the footboard, where, with
extraordinary skill, he contrived to remain.</p>
<p>Reaching the summit of the slope, the train gathered speed,
and with an even louder roar began its headlong journey
through the darkness and the storm, which seemed to increase
in intensity with every passing minute.</p>
<p>For a few seconds the man hung on where he was. Then,
when he had regained his breath, he got on to the upper step
and listened at the door of the corridor at which he found himself.
"No one there," he muttered. "Besides, everyone will be
asleep," and, chancing everything, he rose up, opened the door,
and stepped into the second-class carriage with a grunt of relief.</p>
<p>Making no attempt to conceal himself, he walked boldly into
the lavatory and washed his face that was blackened with the
smoke from outside, and then, in the most leisurely, natural way<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_231">[231]</a></span>
possible, he came out of the lavatory and walked along the corridor,
soliloquising aloud, manifestly not minding whether he
were overheard.</p>
<p>"It's positively maddening! No one can sleep, with travelling
companions like that!"</p>
<p>As he spoke he went along the corridor, rapidly glancing into
every compartment. In one, three men were asleep, obviously
unaware that anyone was surveying them from outside. The
door of the compartment was ajar, and the stranger noiselessly
stepped within. The fourth corner was unoccupied, and here
the man took his seat, laying his bundle down beside him, and
feigning sleep. He waited, motionless, for a good quarter of an
hour, until he was quite satisfied that his companions were really
sleeping soundly, then he slid his hand into the bundle by
his side, seemed to be doing something inside it, then withdrew
his hand noiselessly, stepped out of the compartment, and carefully
closed the door.</p>
<p>In the corridor he drew a sigh of relieved satisfaction, and
took a cigar from his pocket.</p>
<p>"Everything is going splendidly," he said to himself. "I was
cursing this awful storm just now, but it is wonderfully useful to
me. On such a night as this no one would dream of opening the
windows." He strolled up and down, holding on to the hand-rail
with one hand to maintain himself against the rocking of the
train, and every now and then taking out his watch with the
other to see the time. "I haven't any too much time," he muttered.
"I shall have to be quick, or my friend will miss his train!"
He smiled, as if amused at the idea, and then, holding his cigar
away from him so as not to inhale the smoke, he drew several
deep breaths. "There is a faint smell," he said, "but you would
have to be told of it to detect it. The devil of it is that it so often
causes nightmare; that would be awful!" He suspended his patrol
and listened again. There was no sound to be heard from
within the compartments except the snoring of a few travellers
and the monotonous, rhythmical noise of the wheels passing
over the joints of the rails. "Come: I've waited twenty minutes;
it would be risky to wait longer; let's get to work!"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_232">[232]</a></span></p>
<p>He stepped briskly back into the compartment, and furtively
glancing into the corridor to make sure that no one was there,
he went across to the opposite window and opened it wide. He
put his head out into the air for a minute or two, and then
turned to examine his travelling companions. All three were still
sound asleep.</p>
<p>The man gave vent to a dry chuckle. He drew his bundle towards
him, felt until he found something within it, and flung it
back on to the seat. Then he walked up to the man opposite him,
slipped his hand inside his coat and abstracted a pocket-book
and began to examine the papers it contained. "Ah!" he exclaimed
suddenly; "that was what I was afraid of!" and taking
one of the papers he put it inside his own pocket-book, chose
one from his own and put it into the other man's pocket-book,
and then, having effected this exchange, replaced the man's
property and chuckled again. "You do sleep!"</p>
<p>And indeed, although the pick-pocket took no particular precaution,
the man continued to sleep soundly, as did the other
two men in the compartment.</p>
<p>The thief looked once more at his watch.</p>
<p>"Time!"</p>
<p>He leaned out of the open window and slipped back the
safety catch. Then he opened the door quite wide, took the
sleeping traveller by the shoulders and picked him up from the
seat, and with all his strength sent him rolling out on to the line!</p>
<p>The next moment he seized from the rack the light articles
that evidently belonged to his victim, and threw them out after
him.</p>
<p>When he had finished his ghastly work he rubbed his hands
in satisfaction. "Good!" he said, and closing the door again, but
leaving the window down, he left the compartment, not troubling
to pick up his belongings, and walked along the corridors
to another second-class compartment, towards the front of the
train, in which he calmly installed himself.</p>
<p>"Luck has been with me," he muttered as he stretched himself
out on the seat. "Everything has gone off well; no one has
seen me, and those two fools who might have upset my plans<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_233">[233]</a></span>
will wake up quite naturally when they begin to feel the cold;
and they will attribute the headache they will probably feel to
their tiring journey."</p>
<p>A train, travelling in the opposite direction, suddenly roared
past the window and made him jump. He started up, and smiled.</p>
<p>"'Gad! I said my friend would miss his train, but he'll catch it
in another five minutes! In another five minutes, luggage and
body and the entire caboodle will be mincemeat!" and as if completely
reassured by the idea he chuckled again. "Nothing could
have gone better: I can have a rest, and in an hour's time I shall
be at Juvisy, where, thanks to my forethought, I shall be able to
whitewash myself—literally." One thing, however, still seemed
to worry him: he did not know exactly where on the line he had
thrown his unhappy victim, but he had an idea that the train had
run through a small station shortly afterwards; if that was so, the
body might be found sooner than he would have liked. He tried
to dismiss the notion from his mind, but he caught sight of the
telegraph posts speeding past the windows, and he shook his fist
at them malignantly. "That is the only thing that can harm me
now," he muttered.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>"Juvisy! Juvisy! Wait here two minutes!"</p>
<p>It was barely half-past six, and the porters hurried along the
train, calling out the name of the station, and rousing sleepy
travellers from their dreams. A man jumped nimbly out of a second-class
carriage and walked towards the exit from the station,
holding out his ticket. "Season," he said, and passed out rapidly.</p>
<p>"Good idea, that season ticket," he said to himself; "much less
dangerous than an ordinary ticket which the police could have
traced."</p>
<p>He walked briskly towards the subway, crossed the main road,
and took a side turning that led down towards the Seine. Taking
no notice of the mud, the man went into a field and hid himself
in a little thicket on the river bank. He looked carefully all
around him to make sure that he was unobserved, then took off
his overcoat, jacket and trousers, and drawing a bundle from
one of the pockets of his large waterproof, proceeded to dress<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_234">[234]</a></span>
himself anew. As soon as he was dressed, he spread the waterproof
out on the ground, folded up in it the clothes and hat he
had previously been wearing, added a number of heavy stones,
and tied the whole bundle up with a piece of string. He swung
it once or twice at the full length of his arm, and sent it hurtling
right into the middle of the river, where it sank at once.</p>
<p>A few minutes later a bricklayer in his working clothes presented
himself at the Juvisy booking office.</p>
<p>"A workman's ticket to Paris, please, missus," he said, and
having got it, the man went on to the departure platform. "It
would have been risky to use my own ticket," he muttered. "This
return ticket will put them off the scent," and with a smile he
waited for the train that would take him to Paris.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>The slow train from Luchon was drawing near its Paris terminus
and the travellers were all making hasty toilettes and tidying
themselves up after their long night journey. Just, however,
as it was approaching the goods station it slowed down and
stopped. The passengers, surprised, put their heads out of the
windows, to ascertain the reason for the unexpected delay, hazarding
various conjectures but unanimous in their vituperation
of the company.</p>
<p>Three men were walking slowly along the line, looking carefully
at every door. Two were porters, and they were manifesting
the most respectful attention to everything the third man
said: he was a grave individual, very correctly attired.</p>
<p>"Look there, sir," one of the porters exclaimed; "there is a
door where the safety catch has either been undone or not fastened;
that is the only one on the train."</p>
<p>"That is so," said the gentleman, and grasping the handle he
opened the door of the compartment and got in. Two travellers
were busy strapping up their bags, and they turned round in simultaneous
surprise.</p>
<p>"You will pardon me, gentlemen, when you know who I am,"
said the intruder, and throwing open his coat he showed his tricolour
scarf. "I have to make enquiry relative to a dead body that
has been found on the line near Brétigny; it probably fell from<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_235">[235]</a></span>
this train, and perhaps from this compartment, for I have just
observed that the safety catch is not fastened. Where did you get
into the train?"</p>
<p>The two passengers looked at one another in astonishment.</p>
<p>"What a dreadful thing!" one of them exclaimed. "Why, sir, to-night,
while my friend here and I were asleep, one of our fellow-travellers
did disappear. I made a remark about it, but this
gentleman very reasonably pointed out that he must have got
out at some station while we were asleep."</p>
<p>The official was keenly interested.</p>
<p>"What was this passenger like?"</p>
<p>"Quite easily recognised, sir; a man of about sixty, rather
stout, and wearing whiskers."</p>
<p>"That tallies with the description. Might he have been a butler
or a steward?"</p>
<p>"That is exactly what he looked like."</p>
<p>"Then that must be the man whose body has been found
upon the line. But I do not know whether it is to be regarded as
a case of suicide or of murder, for some hand baggage has been
picked up as well: a suicide would not have thrown his luggage
out, and a thief would not have wanted to get rid of it."</p>
<p>The passenger who had not yet spoken, broke in.</p>
<p>"You are wrong, sir; at any rate all his luggage was not thrown
on to the line," and he pointed to the bundle left upon the seat.
"I thought that belonged to the gentleman here, but he has just
told me it isn't his."</p>
<p>The official rapidly unfastened the straps and started back.</p>
<p>"Hullo! A bottle of liquid carbonic acid! Now what does that
mean?" He looked at it. "Did this bundle belong to the man who
disappeared?"</p>
<p>The two passengers shook their heads.</p>
<p>"I don't think so," one of them said; "I should certainly have
noticed that Scotch rug; but I did not see it."</p>
<p>"Then there was a fourth passenger in this compartment?"
the official enquired.</p>
<p>"No, we travelled alone," said one of the men, but the other
dissented.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_236">[236]</a></span></p>
<p>"It is very odd, and I am not sure about it, but I really am
wondering whether someone did not get into our compartment
last night while we were asleep. I have a vague impression that
someone did, but I can't be sure."</p>
<p>"Do try to remember, sir," the official urged him; "it is of the
very highest importance."</p>
<p>But the passenger shook his shoulders doubtfully.</p>
<p>"No, I really can't say anything definite; and, besides, I have a
shocking headache."</p>
<p>The official was silent for a minute or two.</p>
<p>"In my opinion, gentlemen, you have been uncommonly
lucky to escape murder yourselves. I do not quite understand
yet how the murder was done, but I incline to think it proves almost
incredible daring. However——" He stopped and put his
head out of the window. "You can send the train on now," he
called to a porter, and resumed: "However, I must ask you to accompany
me to the stationmaster's office and give me your
names and addresses, and to help me afterwards in the conduct
of the legal investigation."</p>
<p>The two travellers looked at one another in distressed surprise.</p>
<p>"It is really appalling," said one of them; "you're not safe anywhere
nowadays."</p>
<p>"You really aren't," the other agreed. "Such a number of awful
murders and crimes are being perpetrated every day that you
would think not one, but a dozen Fantômas were at work!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_237">[237]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XXVII. Three Surprising Incidents</span></h2>
<p>Nibet went off duty at five in the morning, and returned to
his own home to go to bed. As a general rule he slept like
a top, after a night on duty, but on this occasion he could not
close an eye, being far too uneasy about the consequences of his
co-operation in Gurn's escape.</p>
<p>A few minutes before six in the evening he had taken advantage
of no warders being about to slip Gurn from cell number
127 into number 129, whence he could make his way to the
roof. At six, when he actually came on duty, Nibet opened the
peephole in the door of number 127, as he did in all the others,
and saw that Gurn had made an admirable dummy figure in the
bed: it was so good that it even deceived a head warder who
made a single rapid inspection of all the cells when Nibet was on
one of his several rounds during the night. Obviously Gurn must
have got clear away from the prison, for if he had been caught it
would certainly have become generally known.</p>
<p>These reflections somewhat comforted the restless man, but
he knew that the most difficult part of his task was still before
him: the difficulty of simulating astonishment and distress when
he should get back to the prison presently and be told by his fellow-warders
of the prisoner's escape, and the difficulty of answering
in a natural manner to the close interrogation to which
he would be subjected by the governor and the police, and possibly
even M. Fuselier, who would be in a fine rage when he
learned that his captive had escaped him. Nibet meant to pretend
ignorance and even stupidity. He would far rather be called
a fool, than found out to be a knave and an accomplice.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_238">[238]</a></span></p>
<p>About half-past eleven Nibet got up; Gurn's escape must certainly
be known at the prison by this time. The warder on duty
would have gone to the cell about seven to wake the prisoner,
and though nothing might have been detected then, the cell
would infallibly have been found to be empty at eight o'clock,
when the morning broth was taken round. And then——</p>
<p>As he walked from his home round to the prison, Nibet met
the gang of masons coming out for dinner; he crossed the street
towards them, hoping to hear some news, but they passed by
him in silence, one or two of them giving a careless nod or word
of greeting; at first Nibet took their silence for a bad sign, thinking
they might have been warned to give him no alarm, but he
reflected that if Gurn's escape were discovered, as it surely must
be, the authorities would probably prefer not to let the matter
become widely known.</p>
<p>As he reached the porter's lodge his heart beat violently. What
would old Morin have to tell him? But old Morin was very busy
trying to make his kitchen fire burn properly instead of sending
all the smoke pouring out into the room; the old man's slovenly
figure was just visible in a clearing in the smoke, and he returned
Nibet's salutation with nothing more than a silent salute.</p>
<p>"That's funny!" thought Nibet, and he passed through the
main courtyard towards the clerks' offices at the end. Through
the windows he could see the staff, a few bending over their
work, most of them reading newspapers, none of them obviously
interested in anything special. Next he presented himself
before the warders' turnkey, and again he was allowed to pass on
without a word.</p>
<p>By this time Gurn's accomplice was in a state of such nervous
tension that he could hardly restrain himself from catching hold
of one or other of the warders whom he saw at their work, and
asking them questions. How could the escape of so important a
prisoner as the man who had murdered Lord Beltham create so
little excitement as this? Nibet longed to rush up the flights of
stairs to number 127 and interrogate the warder who had gone
on duty after himself, and whom he was now about to relieve in
turn. He must surely know all about it. But it would not do to<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_239">[239]</a></span>
create suspicion, and Nibet had sufficient self-control left to go
upstairs at his usual leisurely pace. Outwardly calm and steady,
he reached his post just as the clock was striking twelve; he was
ever punctuality itself, and he was due on duty at noon.</p>
<p>"Well, Colas," he said to his colleague, "here I am; you can go
now."</p>
<p>"Good!" said the warder. "I'll be off at once. I'm on again at
six to-night," and he moved away.</p>
<p>"Everything all right?" Nibet enquired, in a tone he tried to
make as casual as possible, but that trembled a little nevertheless.</p>
<p>"Quite," said Colas, perfectly naturally, and he went away.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Nibet could contain himself no longer, and the next second he
threw caution to the winds: rushing to Gurn's cell he flung the
door open.</p>
<p>Gurn was there, sitting on the foot of his bed with his legs
crossed and a note-book on his knees, making notes with the
quietest attention: he scarcely appeared to notice Nibet's violent
invasion.</p>
<p>"Oh! So you are there?" stammered the astonished warder.</p>
<p>Gurn raised his head and looked at the warder with a cryptic
gaze.</p>
<p>"Yes, I'm here."</p>
<p>All manner of notions crowded through Nibet's brain, but he
could find words for none of them. Had the plot been discovered
before Gurn had had time to get away, or had a trap been
laid for himself through the medium of one of the prisoners to
test his own incorruptibility? Nibet went white, and leaned
against the wall for support. At last Gurn spoke again, reassuring
him with a smile.</p>
<p>"Don't look so miserable," he said. "I am here. That is a matter
of absolutely no importance. We will suppose that nothing
passed between us yesterday, and—that's an end to it."</p>
<p>"So you haven't gone, you didn't go?" said Nibet again.</p>
<p>"No," Gurn replied; "since you are so interested, all I need
say is that I was afraid to risk it at the last minute."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_240">[240]</a></span></p>
<p>Nibet had cast a keen and experienced eye all over the cell;
under the washstand he saw the little bundle of clothes which
he had brought the prisoner the previous day. He rightly opined
that the first thing to do was to remove these dangerous articles,
whose presence in Gurn's cell would appear very suspicious if
they happened to be discovered. He took the bundle and was
hurriedly stowing it away under his own clothes, when he uttered
an exclamation of surprise; the things were wet, and he
knew from his own experience that the rain had never ceased
throughout the whole of the night.</p>
<p>"Gurn," he said reproachfully, "you are up to some trick!
These things are soaked. You must have gone out last night, or
these things would not be like this."</p>
<p>Gurn smiled sympathetically at the warder.</p>
<p>"Not so bad!" he remarked; "that's pretty good reasoning
for a mere gaoler." And as Nibet was about to press the matter,
Gurn anticipated his questions, and made frank confession.
"Well, yes, I did try to get out,—got as far as the clerk's
office last evening, but at the last minute I funked it, and went
back on to the roof. But when I got into number 129 again I
found I could not get back into my own cell, for, as you know,
129 was locked outside; so to avoid detection I returned to the
roof and spent the night there; at daybreak I took advantage
of the little disturbance caused by the workmen coming in,
and slipped down from the roof just as they were going up. As
soon as I found myself on this floor I ran along this corridor
and slipped into my cell. When your friend Colas brought me
my broth he did not notice that my cell was unlocked,—and
there you are!"</p>
<p>The explanation was not altogether convincing, but Nibet listened
to it and pondered the situation. On the whole, it was
much better that things should be as they were, but the warder
was wondering how the great lady, who paid so mighty well,
might take the matter. She most certainly had not promised so
large a sum of money, nor paid the good round sum of ten thousand
francs down in advance, merely in order that Gurn might
have a little walk upon the tiles. What was to be done with re<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_241">[241]</a></span>gard
to that personage? With much ingenuousness Nibet confided
his anxiety to the prisoner, who laughed.</p>
<p>"It's not all over yet," he declared. "Indeed, it is only just beginning.
What if we only wanted to test you, and prove your
quality? Make your mind easy, Nibet. If Gurn is in prison at the
present moment it is because he has his own reasons for being
there. But who is able to predict the future?"</p>
<p>It was time for Gurn to go to the exercise yard, and Nibet, reassuming
the uncompromising attitude that all warders ought to
maintain when in custody of prisoners, led the murderer down
to the courtyard.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>In his office at the Law Courts, M. Fuselier was having a private
interview with Juve, and listening with much interest to
what the clever detective inspector was saying to him.</p>
<p>"I tell you again, sir, I attach great importance to the finding
of this ordnance map in Gurn's rooms."</p>
<p>"Yes?" said M. Fuselier, with a touch of scepticism.</p>
<p>"And I will tell you why," Juve went on. "About a year ago,
when I was engaged on the case of the murder of the Marquise
de Langrune at her château of Beaulieu, down in Lot, I found a
small piece of a map showing the district in which I was at the
time. I took it to M. de Presles, the magistrate who was conducting
the enquiry. He attached no importance to it, and I myself
could not see at the time that it gave us any new evidence."</p>
<p>"Quite so," said M. Fuselier. "There is nothing particularly remarkable
in finding a map, or a piece of a map, showing a district,
in the district itself."</p>
<p>"Those are M. de Presles' very words to me," said Juve with a
smile. "And I will give you the same answer I gave him, namely,
that if some day we could find the other portion of the map
which completed the first piece we found, and could identify
the owner of the two portions, there would then be a formal
basis on which to proceed to base an argument."</p>
<p>"Proceed to base it," M. Fuselier suggested.</p>
<p>"That's very easy," said Juve. "The fragment of map numbered
1, found at Beaulieu, belongs to X. I do not know who X is; but<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_242">[242]</a></span>
in Paris, in Gurn's rooms, I find the fragment of map numbered
2, which belongs to Gurn. If it turns out, as I expect, that the
two fragments of map, when placed together, form a single and
complete whole, I shall conclude logically that X, who was the
owner of fragment number 1, is the same as the owner of fragment
number 2, to wit, Gurn."</p>
<p>"How are you going to find out?" enquired M. Fuselier.</p>
<p>"It is in order to find it out that we have sent for Dollon," Juve
replied. "He was steward to the late Marquise de Langrune, and
has all the circumstantial evidence relating to that case. If he has
still got the fragment of map, it will be simplicity itself to prove
what I have suggested, and perhaps to make the identification I
suggest."</p>
<p>"Yes," said M. Fuselier, "but if you do succeed, will it be of really
great importance in your opinion? Will you be able to infer
from that one fact that Gurn and the man who murdered the
Marquise de Langrune are one and the same person? Is not that
going rather far? Especially as, if I remember rightly, it was
proved that the murderer in that case was the son of a M.
Rambert, and this young Rambert committed suicide after the
crime?"</p>
<p>Juve evaded the issue.</p>
<p>"Well, we shall see," was all he said.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>The magistrate's clerk came into the room and unceremoniously
interrupted the conversation.</p>
<p>"It has gone two, sir," he said. "There are some prisoners to
examine, and a whole lot of witnesses," and he placed two bulky
bundles of papers before the magistrate and waited for a sign to
call the various persons, free or otherwise, whom the magistrate
had to see.</p>
<p>The first bundle caught Juve's attention. It was endorsed
"Royal Palace Hotel Case."</p>
<p>"Anything new about the robbery from Mme. Van den Rosen
and Princess Sonia Danidoff?" he enquired, and as the magistrate
shook his head, he added, "Are you going to examine
Muller now?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_243">[243]</a></span></p>
<p>"Yes," said the magistrate; "at once."</p>
<p>"And after that you are to examine Gurn, aren't you, in connection
with the Beltham case?"</p>
<p>"Quite so."</p>
<p>"I wish you would oblige me by confronting the two men
here, in my presence."</p>
<p>M. Fuselier looked up in surprise: he could not see what connection
there could be between the two utterly dissimilar cases.
What object could Juve have in wanting the man who had murdered
Lord Beltham to be confronted with the unimportant
little hotel servant who had really been arrested rather as a concession
to public opinion than because he was actually deemed
capable of burglary or attempted burglary? Might not Juve, with
his known mania for associating all crimes with each other, be
going just a little too far in the present instance?</p>
<p>"You have got some idea in the back of your head?" said M.
Fuselier.</p>
<p>"I've got a—a scar in the palm of my hand," Juve answered
with a smile, and as the magistrate confessed that he failed to
understand, Juve enlightened him. "We know that the man
who did that robbery at the Royal Palace Hotel burned his
hand badly when he was cutting the electric wires in the
Princess's bathroom. Well, a few weeks ago, while I was on the
look out for someone with a scar from such a wound, I was told
of a man who was prowling about the slums. I had the fellow
followed up, and the very night the hunt began I was going to
arrest him, when, a good deal to my surprise, I discovered that
he was no other than Gurn. He escaped me that time, but
when he was caught later on I found that he has an unmistakable
scar inside the palm of his right hand; it is fading now, for
the burn was only superficial, but it is there. Now do you see
my idea?"</p>
<p>"Yes, I do," the magistrate exclaimed, "and I am all the more
glad to hear of it, since I am to have both the men here now.
Shall I have Muller in first?"</p>
<p>Juve assented....</p>
<p>"So you still refuse to confess?" said the magistrate at last.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_244">[244]</a></span>
"You still maintain that your—extraordinary—order to let the
red-haired waiter out, was given in good faith?"</p>
<p>"Yes, yes, yes, sir," the night watchman answered. "That very
evening a new servant had joined the staff. I had not even set
eyes on him. When I saw this—stranger——, I took him to be
the servant who had been engaged the day before, and I told
them to open the door for him. That is the real truth."</p>
<p>"And that is all?"</p>
<p>"That is positively all."</p>
<p>"We are only charging you with complicity," the magistrate
went on, "for the man who touched the electric wires burned his
hand; that is a strong point in your favour. And you also say that
if the thief were put before you, you could recognise him?"</p>
<p>"Yes," said the man confidently.</p>
<p>"Good!" said M. Fuselier, and he signed to his clerk to call in
another personage.</p>
<p>The clerk understood, and Gurn was brought in between two
municipal guards, and was followed by the young licentiate in
law, Maître Roger de Seras, who represented his leader at most
of these preliminary examinations. As Gurn came in, with the
light from the window falling full on his face, M. Fuselier gave
a curt order.</p>
<p>"Muller, turn round and look at this man!"</p>
<p>Muller obeyed, and surveyed with some bewilderment, and
without the least comprehension, the bold head and the well-built,
muscular frame of Lord Beltham's murderer. Gurn did not
flinch.</p>
<p>"Do you recognise that man?" the magistrate demanded.</p>
<p>Muller ransacked his brains and looked again at Gurn, then
shook his head.</p>
<p>"No, sir."</p>
<p>"Gurn, open your right hand," the magistrate ordered. "Show
it," and he turned again to Muller. "The man before you seems
to have been burned in the palm of the hand, as that scar shows.
Can you not remember having seen that man at the Royal
Palace Hotel?"</p>
<p>Muller looked steadily at Gurn.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_245">[245]</a></span></p>
<p>"On my honour, sir, although it would be to my interest to
recognise him, I am bound to acknowledge that I really and
truly don't."</p>
<p>M. Fuselier had a brief conversation aside with Juve, and
then, the detective appearing to agree with him, turned once
more to the night watchman.</p>
<p>"Muller," he said, "the court is pleased with your frankness.
You will be set free provisionally, but you are to hold yourself at
the disposal of the court of enquiry," and he signed to the municipal
guards to lead the gratefully protesting man away.</p>
<p>Meanwhile Gurn's case appeared to him to be becoming
much more serious, and much more interesting. He had the
prisoner placed in front of him, while Juve, who had withdrawn
into a dark corner of the room, never took his eyes off the
murderer.</p>
<p>"Gurn," he began, "can you give me an account of your time
during the second half of December of last year?"</p>
<p>Gurn was unprepared for the point-blank question, and made
a gesture of doubt. M. Fuselier, probably anticipating a sensation,
was just on the point of ordering Dollon to be called, when
he was interrupted by a discreet tap on the door. His clerk went
to answer it, and saw a gendarme standing at the door. At almost
the first words he said, the clerk uttered an exclamation and
wheeled round to the magistrate.</p>
<p>"Oh, M. Fuselier, listen! They have just told me——"</p>
<p>But the gendarme had come in. He saluted the magistrate
and handed him a letter which M. Fuselier hastily tore open and
read.</p>
<p class="center">
"To M. Germain Fuselier, Examining Magistrate,<br/>
The Law Courts, Paris.</p>
<div class="blockquot">
<p>"The special commissioner at Brétigny station has the honour
to report that this morning at 8 <span class="smcap">a.m.</span> the police informed him of
the discovery on the railway line, five kilomètres from Brétigny
on the Orléans side, of the dead body of a man who must either
have fallen accidentally or been thrown intentionally from a
train bound for Paris. The body had been mutilated by a train<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_246">[246]</a></span>
travelling in the other direction, but papers found on the person
of the deceased, and in particular a summons found in his
pocket, show that his name was Dollon, and that he was on his
way to Paris to wait upon you.</p>
<p>"The special commissioner at Brétigny station has, quite late,
been informed of the following facts: passengers who left the
train on its arrival at the Austerlitz terminus at 5 <span class="smcap">a.m.</span> were examined
by the special commissioner at that station, and subsequently
allowed to go. Possibly you have already been informed.
We have, however, thought it our duty, after having searched the
body, to report this identification to you, and have therefore
requisitioned an officer of the police at Brétigny to convey to
you the information contained in this communication."</p></div>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>M. Fuselier had turned pale as he read this letter. He handed
it to Juve. With feverish haste the famous detective read it
through and wheeled round to the gendarme.</p>
<p>"Tell me, do you know what has been done? Do you know if
this man's papers, all his papers, were found and have been preserved?"</p>
<p>The man shook his head in ignorance. Juve clasped the magistrate's
hand. "I'm off to Brétigny this instant," he said in a low
tone.</p>
<p>Throughout this incident Maître Roger de Seras had remained
in a state of blank incomprehension.</p>
<p>Gurn's face was more expressionless and impenetrable than
ever.</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_247">[247]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XXVIII. The Court of Assize</span></h2>
<p>"Call Lady Beltham!"</p>
<p>It was a perfect May day, and everyone who could pretend,
on any conceivable ground, to belong to "Paris" had schemed
and intrigued to obtain admission to a trial over which public
opinion had been excited for months: the trial of Gurn for the
murder of Lord Beltham, ex-Ambassador and foremost man of
fashion, whose murder, two years before, had caused a great
sensation.</p>
<p>The preliminary formalities of the trial had furnished nothing
to tickle the palates of the sensation-loving crowd. The indictment
had been almost inaudible, and, besides, it contained
nothing that had not already been made public by the Press.
Nor had the examination of the prisoner been any more interesting;
Gurn sat, strangely impassive, in the dock between two
municipal guards, and hardly listened to his counsel, the eminent
Maître Barberoux, who was assisted by a galaxy of juniors,
including young Roger de Seras. Moreover, Gurn had frankly
confessed his guilt almost immediately after his arrest. There
was not much for him to add to what he had said before, although
the President of the Court pressed him as to some points
which were still not satisfactorily clear with respect to his own
identity, and the motives which had prompted him to commit
his crime, and, subsequently, to pay that most risky visit to Lady
Beltham, at the close of which Juve had effected his arrest.</p>
<p>But Lady Beltham's evidence promised to be much more interesting.
Rumour had been busy for a long time with the great
lady and her feelings, and odd stories were being whispered.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_248">[248]</a></span>
She was said to be beautiful, wealthy and charitable; people
said, under their breath, that she must know a good deal about
the murder of her spouse, and when she made her appearance
in the box a sudden hush fell upon the crowded court. She was,
indeed, a most appealing figure, robed in long black weeds,
young, graceful, and very pale, so sympathetic a figure that scandal
was forgotten in the general tense desire to hear her answers
to the President of the Court.</p>
<p>Following the usher to the witness-box, she took off her
gloves as desired, and, in a voice that trembled slightly but was
beautifully modulated, repeated the words of the oath, with her
right hand raised the while. Noticing her agitation, the
President mitigated somewhat the harshness of the tone in
which he generally spoke to witnesses.</p>
<p>"Pray compose yourself, madame. I am sorry to be obliged to
subject you to this examination, but the interests of Justice require
it. Come now: you are Lady Beltham, widow of the late
Lord Beltham, of English nationality, residing in Paris, at your
own house in Neuilly?"</p>
<p>"Yes."</p>
<p>"Will you kindly turn round, madame, and tell me if you know
the prisoner in the dock?"</p>
<p>Lady Beltham obeyed mechanically; she glanced at Gurn,
who paled a little, and answered the President.</p>
<p>"Yes, I know the prisoner; his name is Gurn."</p>
<p>"Very good, madame. Can you tell me first of all how you
came to be acquainted with him?"</p>
<p>"When my husband was in South Africa, at the time of the
Boer War, Gurn was a sergeant in the regular army. It was then
that I first met him."</p>
<p>"Did you know him well at that time?"</p>
<p>Lady Beltham seemed to be unable to prevent herself from
casting long glances at the prisoner; she appeared to be almost
hypnotised and frightened by his close proximity.</p>
<p>"I saw very little of Gurn in the Transvaal," she answered. "It
was just by chance that I learned his name, but of course the difference
between his own rank and my husband's position made<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_249">[249]</a></span>
the relations that I could have with a mere sergeant very limited
indeed."</p>
<p>"Yes, Gurn was a sergeant," the President said. "And after the
war, madame, did you see the prisoner again?"</p>
<p>"Yes, immediately after the war; my husband and I went to
England by the same boat on which Gurn went home."</p>
<p>"Did you see much of him on board?"</p>
<p>"No; we were first-class passengers, and he, I believe, went
second. It was just by accident that my husband caught sight of
him soon after the boat sailed."</p>
<p>The President paused and made a note.</p>
<p>"Were those all the relations your husband had with the
prisoner?"</p>
<p>"They are at any rate all the relations I had with him," Lady
Beltham replied in tones of some distress; "but I know that my
husband employed Gurn on several occasions, to help him in
various affairs and matters of business."</p>
<p>"Thank you," said the President; "we will return to that point
presently. Meanwhile there is one question I should like to ask
you. If you had met the prisoner in the street a few months ago,
should you have recognised him? Was his face still distinct in
your memory, or had it become blurred and vague?"</p>
<p>Lady Beltham hesitated, then answered confidently.</p>
<p>"I am sure I should not have recognised him; and some proof
of this is, that just before his arrest was effected I was conversing
with the prisoner for several minutes, without having the
faintest idea that the poor man with whom I imagined I had to
do was no other than the man Gurn for whom the police were
looking."</p>
<p>The President nodded, and Maître Barberoux leaned forward
and spoke eagerly to his client in the dock. But the President
continued immediately.</p>
<p>"You must forgive me, madame, for putting a question that
may seem rather brutal, and also for reminding you of your oath
to tell us the entire truth. Did you love your husband?"</p>
<p>Lady Beltham quivered and was silent for a moment, as
though endeavouring to frame a right answer.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_250">[250]</a></span></p>
<p>"Lord Beltham was much older than myself——," she began,
and then, perceiving the meaning implicit in her words, she
added: "I had the very highest esteem for him, and a very real
affection."</p>
<p>A cynical smile curled the lip of the President, and he glanced
at the jury as though asking them to pay still closer attention.</p>
<p>"Do you know why I put that question to you?" he asked, and
as Lady Beltham confessed her ignorance he went on: "It has
been suggested, madame, by a rumour which is very generally
current in the newspapers and among people generally, that the
prisoner may possibly have been greatly enamoured of you: that
perhaps—well, is there any truth in this?"</p>
<p>As he spoke the President bent forward, and his eyes seemed
to pierce right through Lady Beltham.</p>
<p>"It is a wicked calumny," she protested, turning very pale.</p>
<p>Throughout the proceedings Gurn had been sitting in an attitude
of absolute indifference, almost of scorn; but now he rose
to his feet and uttered a defiant protest.</p>
<p>"Sir," he said to the President of the Court, "I desire to say
publicly here that I have the most profound and unalterable respect
for Lady Beltham. Anyone who has given currency to the
malignant rumour you refer to, is a liar. I have confessed that I
killed Lord Beltham, and I do not retract that confession, but I
never made any attempt upon his honour, and no word, nor
look, nor deed has ever passed between Lady Beltham and myself,
that might not have passed before Lord Beltham's own
eyes."</p>
<p>The President looked sharply at the prisoner.</p>
<p>"Then tell me what your motive was in murdering your
victim."</p>
<p>"I have told you already! Lady Beltham is not to be implicated
in my deed in any way! I had constant business dealings with
Lord Beltham; I asked him, over the telephone, to come to my
place one day. He came. We had an animated discussion; he got
warm and I answered angrily; then I lost control of myself and
in a moment of madness I killed him! I am profoundly sorry for
my crime and stoop to crave pardon for it; but I cannot tolerate<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_251">[251]</a></span>
the suggestion that the murder I committed was in the remotest
way due to sentimental relations with a lady who is, I repeat, entitled
to the very highest respect from the whole world."</p>
<p>A murmur of sympathy ran through the court at this chivalrous
declaration, by which the jury, who had not missed a word,
seemed to be entirely convinced. But the President was trained
to track truth in detail, and he turned again to Lady Beltham
who still stood in the witness-box, very pale, and swaying with
distress.</p>
<p>"You must forgive me if I attach no importance to a mere assertion,
madame. The existence of some relations between
yourself and the prisoner, which delicacy would prompt him to
conceal, and honour would compel you to deny, would alter the
whole aspect of this case." He turned to the usher. "Recall
Mme. Doulenques, please."</p>
<p>Mme. Doulenques considered it a tremendous honour to be
called as witness in a trial with which the press was ringing, and
was particularly excited because she had just been requested to
pose for her photograph by a representative of her own favourite
paper. She followed the usher to where Lady Beltham stood.</p>
<p>"You told us just now, Mme. Doulenques," the President said
suavely, "that your lodger, Gurn, often received visits from a lady
friend. You also said that if this lady were placed before you, you
would certainly recognise her. Now will you kindly look at the
lady in the box: is this the same person?"</p>
<p>Mme. Doulenques, crimson with excitement, and nervously
twisting in her hands a huge pair of white gloves which she had
bought for this occasion, looked curiously at Lady Beltham.</p>
<p>"Upon my word I can't be sure that this is the lady," she said
after quite a long pause.</p>
<p>"But you were so certain of your facts just now," the President
smiled encouragingly.</p>
<p>"But I can't see the lady very well, with all those veils on,"
Mme. Doulenques protested.</p>
<p>Lady Beltham did not wait for the request which the
President would inevitably have made, but haughtily put back
her veil.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_252">[252]</a></span></p>
<p>"Do you recognise me now?" she said coldly.</p>
<p>The scorn in her tone upset Mme. Doulenques. She looked
again at Lady Beltham and turned instinctively as if to ask enlightenment
from Gurn, whose face, however, was expressionless,
and then replied:</p>
<p>"It's just what I told you before, your worship: I can't be sure;
I couldn't swear to it."</p>
<p>"But you think she is?"</p>
<p>"You know, your worship," Mme. Doulenques protested, "I
took an oath just now to tell the truth, and nothing but the truth;
so I don't want to tell any stories; well, this lady might be the
same lady, and again she mightn't be."</p>
<p>"In other words, you cannot give a definite answer."</p>
<p>"That's it," said the concierge. "I don't know; I can't swear.
This lady is like the other lady—there's a sort of family likeness
between them——, but at the moment I do not exactly recognise
her; it's much too serious!"</p>
<p>Mme. Doulenques would willingly have continued to give evidence
for ever and a day, but the President cut her short.</p>
<p>"Very well; thank you," he said, and dismissed her with the
usher, turning again meanwhile to Lady Beltham.</p>
<p>"Will you kindly tell me now what your personal opinion is as
to the relative culpability of the prisoner? Of course you understand
that he has confessed to the crime, and your answer will
bear chiefly on the motive that may have actuated him."</p>
<p>Lady Beltham appeared to have recovered some of her
confidence.</p>
<p>"I cannot say anything definite, can only express a very vague
feeling about the matter. I know my husband was quick-tempered,
very quick-tempered, and even violent; and his
peremptory temper predisposed him to positive convictions. He
maintained what he considered his rights at all times and against
all comers; if, as the prisoner says, there was a heated discussion,
I should not be surprised if my husband did make use of arguments
that might have provoked anger."</p>
<p>The President gently gave a clearer turn to the phrase she
used.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_253">[253]</a></span></p>
<p>"So, in your opinion, the prisoner's version of the story is quite
permissible? You admit that Lord Beltham and his murderer
may have had a heated discussion, as a consequence of which
Gurn committed this crime? That is your honest belief?"</p>
<p>"Yes," Lady Beltham answered, trying to control her voice; "I
believe that that may be what took place. And then, it is the only
way in which I can find the least excuse for the crime this man
Gurn committed."</p>
<p>The President picked up the word, in astonishment.</p>
<p>"Do you want to find excuses for him, madame?"</p>
<p>Lady Beltham stood erect, and looked at the President.</p>
<p>"It is written that to pardon is the first duty of good
Christians. It is true that I have mourned my husband, but the
punishment of his murderer will not dry my tears; I ought to forgive
him, bow beneath the burden that is laid upon my soul: and
I do forgive him!"</p>
<p>Ghastly pale, Gurn was staring at Lady Beltham from the
dock; and this time his emotion was so visible that all the jury
noticed it. The President held a brief colloquy with his colleagues,
asked the prisoner's counsel whether he desired to put
any questions to the witness, and, receiving a reply in the negative,
dismissed Lady Beltham with a word of thanks, and announced
that the Court would adjourn.</p>
<p>Immediately a hum of conversation broke out in the warm
and sunny court; barristers in their robes moved from group to
group, criticising, explaining, prophesying; and in their seats the
world of beauty and fashion bowed and smiled and gossiped.</p>
<p>"She's uncommonly pretty, this Lady Beltham," one young
lawyer said, "and she's got a way of answering questions without
compromising herself, and yet without throwing blame on the
prisoner, that is uncommonly clever."</p>
<p>"You are all alike, you men," said a pretty, perfectly dressed
woman in mocking tones; "if a woman is young, and hasn't got a
hump on her back, and has a charming voice, your sympathies
are with her at once! Oh, yes, they are! Now shall I tell you what
your Lady Beltham really is? Well, she is nothing more nor less
than a barnstormer! She knew well enough how to get on the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_254">[254]</a></span>
soft side of the judge, who was quite ridiculously amiable to her,
and to capture the sympathy of the Court. I think it was outrageous
to declare that she had married a man who was too old for
her, and to say that she felt nothing but esteem for him!"</p>
<p>"There's an admission!" the young barrister laughed. "<i>Vive
l'amour</i>, eh? And <i>mariages de convenance</i> are played out, eh?"</p>
<p>On another bench a little further away, a clean-shaven man
with a highly intelligent face was talking animatedly.</p>
<p>"Bosh! Your Lady Beltham is anything you like: what do I care
for Lady Beltham? I shall never play women's parts, shall I? She
does not stand for anything. But Gurn, now! There's a type, if
you like! What an interesting, characteristic face! He has the
head of the assassin of genius, with perfect mastery of self, implacable,
cruel, malignant, a Torquemada of a man!"</p>
<p>"Your enthusiasm is running away with you," someone
laughed.</p>
<p>"I don't care! It is so seldom one comes across figures in a city
that really are figures, entities. That man is not an assassin: he is
The Assassin—the Type!"</p>
<p>Two ladies, sitting close to this enthusiast, had been listening
keenly to this diatribe.</p>
<p>"Do you know who that is?" one whispered to the other. "That
is Valgrand, the actor," and they turned their lorgnettes on the
actor who was waxing more animated every moment.</p>
<p>A bell rang, and, heralded by the usher proclaiming silence,
the judges returned to the bench and the jury to their box. The
President cast an eagle eye over the court, compelling silence,
and then resumed the proceedings.</p>
<p>"Next witness: call M. Juve!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_255">[255]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XXIX. Verdict and Sentence</span></h2>
<p>Once more a wave of sensation ran through the court. There
was not a single person present who had not heard of Juve
and his wonderful exploits, or who did not regard him as a kind
of hero. All leaned forward to watch him as he followed the
usher to the witness-box, wholly unaffected in manner and not
seeking to make any capital out of his popularity. Indeed, he
seemed rather to be uneasy, almost nervous, as one of the oldest
pressmen present remarked audibly.</p>
<p>He took the oath, and the President of the Court addressed
him in friendly tones.</p>
<p>"You are quite familiar with procedure, M. Juve. Which
would you prefer: that I should interrogate you, or that I should
leave you to tell your story in your own way? You know how important
it is; for it is you who are, so to speak, the originator of
the trial to-day, inasmuch as it was your great detective skill that
brought about the arrest of the criminal, after it had also discovered
his crime."</p>
<p>"Since you are so kind, sir," Juve answered, "I will make my
statement first, and then be ready to answer any questions that
may be put to me by yourself, or by counsel for the defence."</p>
<p>Juve turned to the dock and fixed his piercing eyes on the impassive
face of Gurn, who met it unflinchingly. Juve shrugged
his shoulders slightly, and, turning half round to the jury, began
his statement. He did not propose, he said, to recite the story of
his enquiries, which had resulted in the arrest of Gurn, for this
had been set forth fully in the indictment, and the jury had also
seen his depositions at the original examination: he had nothing<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_256">[256]</a></span>
to add to, or to subtract from, his previous evidence. He merely
asked for the jury's particular attention; for, although he was adducing
nothing new in the case actually before them, he had
some unexpected disclosures to make about the prisoner's personal
culpability. The first point which he desired to emphasise
was that human intelligence should hesitate before no improbability,
however improbable, provided that some explanation
was humanly conceivable, and no definite material object rendered
the improbability an impossibility. His whole statement
would be based on the principle that the probable is incontestable
and true, until proof of the contrary has been
established.</p>
<p>"Gentlemen," he went on, "hitherto the police have remained
impotent, and justice has been disarmed, in presence of a number
of serious cases of crime, committed recently and still unsolved.
Let me recall these cases to your memory: they were the
murder of the Marquise de Langrune at her château of
Beaulieu; the robberies from Mme. Van den Rosen and the
Princess Sonia Danidoff; the murder of Dollon, the former
steward of the Marquise de Langrune, when on his way from
the neighbourhood of Saint-Jaury to Paris in obedience to a
summons sent him by M. Germain Fuselier; and, lastly, the
murder of Lord Beltham, prior to the cases just enumerated, for
which the prisoner in the dock is at this moment standing his
trial. Gentlemen, I have to say that all these cases, the Beltham,
Langrune and Dollon murders, and the Rosen-Danidoff burglaries,
are absolutely and indisputably to be attributed to one
and the same individual, to that man standing there—Gurn!"</p>
<p>Having made this extraordinary assertion, Juve again turned
round towards the prisoner. That mysterious person appeared to
be keenly interested in what the detective said, but it would
have been difficult to say whether he was merely surprised, or
not rather perturbed and excited as well. Juve hushed, with a
wave of his hand, the murmur that ran round the court, and resumed
his address.</p>
<p>"My assertion that Gurn is the sole person responsible for all
these crimes has surprised you, gentlemen, but I have proofs<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_257">[257]</a></span>
which must, I think, convince you. I will not go into the details
of each of those cases, for the newspapers have made you quite
familiar with them, but I will be as brief and as lucid as I can.</p>
<p>"My first point, gentlemen, is this: the murderer of the
Marquise de Langrune and the man who robbed Mme. Van den
Rosen and Princess Sonia Danidoff are one and the same person.</p>
<p>"That is shown beyond dispute by tests made in the two cases
with a Bertillon dynamometer, an instrument of the nicest exactitude,
which proved that the same individual operated in both
cases; that is one point made good. And next, the man who
robbed Mme. Van den Rosen and Princess Sonia is Gurn. That
is proved to equal demonstration by the fact that the burglar
burned his hand while engaged upon his crime, and that Gurn
has a scar on his hand which betrays him as the criminal; the
scar is faint now perhaps, but I can testify that it was very obvious
at the time of a disturbance which occurred at a low café
named the Saint-Anthony's Pig, where, accompanied by detective
Lemaroy, who is still in hospital for treatment for injuries
received on that occasion, I attempted, and failed, to arrest this
man Gurn.</p>
<p>"Thus, gentlemen, I prove that the Langrune and Danidoff
cases are the work of but one man, and that man, Gurn.</p>
<p>"I come to another point. As you know, the murder of the
Marquise de Langrune was attended by some strange circumstances.
At the inquest it was proved that the murderer most
probably got into the house from outside, opening the front
door with a skeleton key, and that he obtained admission into
the bedroom of the Marquise, not by burglarious means—I lay
insistence upon that—but by the simple means of her having
opened the door to him, which she did on the strength of his
name, and, finally, that if robbery was the motive of the crime,
the nature of the robbery remained a mystery.</p>
<p>"Now I have ascertained, gentlemen, and—if, as I shall ask
you presently, you decide to have an adjournment and a supplementary
investigation—I shall be able to prove two important
facts. The first is that the Marquise had in her possession a lottery
ticket which had just won a large first prize; this ticket had<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_258">[258]</a></span>
been sent to her by M. Etienne Rambert. This ticket was not
found at the time, but it was subsequently traced to a person,
who for the moment has utterly disappeared, who declared that
it was given to him by M. Etienne Rambert. And it is further
noteworthy that M. Etienne Rambert seemed to be in greater
funds from that time. The second fact I have ascertained is that,
although M. Etienne Rambert pretended to get into a first-class
carriage of a slow train at the gare d'Orsay, he most certainly was
not in that train between Vierzon and Limoges: I can, if you
wish, call a witness who inspected all the compartments of that
carriage, and can prove that he was not there.</p>
<p>"The probable, almost certain, inference is that M. Etienne
Rambert got into that slow train at the gare d'Orsay for the definite
purpose of establishing an alibi, and then got out of it on
the other side, and entered an express that was going in the
same direction, and in front of the slow train.</p>
<p>"You may remember that it was shown that all trains stopped
at the mouth of the Verrières tunnel, near Beaulieu, and that it
was possible for a man to get out of the express, commit the
crime and then return—I would remind you of the footprints
found on the embankment—and get into the slow train which
followed the express at an interval of three hours and a half, and
get out of that train at Verrières station. The passenger who did
that, was the criminal, and it was M. Etienne Rambert.</p>
<p>"As I have already proved that it was Gurn who murdered the
Marquise de Langrune, it seems to follow necessarily that M.
Etienne Rambert must be Gurn!"</p>
<p>Juve paused to make sure that the jury had followed his deductions
and taken all his points. He proceeded, in the most
tense hush.</p>
<p>"We have just identified Gurn with Rambert and proved that
Rambert-Gurn is guilty of the Beltham and Langrune murders,
and the robbery from Mme. Van den Rosen and Princess Sonia
Danidoff. There remains the murder of the steward, Dollon.</p>
<p>"Gentlemen, when Gurn was arrested on the single charge of
the murder of Lord Beltham, you will readily believe that his
one fear was that all these other crimes, for which I have just<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_259">[259]</a></span>
shown him to be responsible, might be brought up against him.
I was just then on the very point of finding out the truth, but I
had not yet done so. A single link was missing in the chain which
would connect Gurn with Rambert, and identify the murderer
of Lord Beltham as the author of the other crimes. That link was
some common clue, or, better still, some object belonging to the
murderer of Lord Beltham, which had been forgotten and left
on the scene of the Langrune murder.</p>
<p>"That object I found. It was a fragment of a map, picked up
in a field near the château of Beaulieu, in the path which
Etienne Rambert must have followed from the railway line; it
was a fragment cut out of a large ordnance map, and the rest of
the map I found in Gurn's rooms, thereby identifying Gurn with
Rambert.</p>
<p>"Gentlemen, the fragment of map which was picked up in the
field was left in the custody of the steward Dollon. That unfortunate
man was summoned to Paris by M. Germain Fuselier.
There was only one person who had any interest in preventing
Dollon from coming, and that person was Gurn, or it would be
better to say Rambert-Gurn; and you know that Dollon was
killed before he reached M. Germain Fuselier. Is it necessary to
declare that it was Gurn, Rambert-Gurn, who killed him?"</p>
<p>Juve said the last words in tones of such earnest and solemn
denunciation that the truth of them seemed beyond all doubt.
And yet he read incredulous surprise in the attitude of the jury.
From the body of the court, too, a murmur rose that was not
sympathetic. Juve realised that the sheer audacity of his theory
must come as a shock, and he knew how difficult it would be to
convince anyone who had not followed every detail of the case
as he himself had done.</p>
<p>"Gentlemen," he said, "I know that my assertions about the
multiple crimes of this man Gurn must fill you with amazement.
That does not dismay me. There is one other name which I must
mention, perhaps to silence your objections, perhaps to show the
vast importance I attach to the deductions which I have just been
privileged to detail to you. This is the last thing I have to say:</p>
<p>"The man who has been capable of assuming in turn the guise<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_260">[260]</a></span>
of Gurn, and of Etienne Rambert, and of the man of fashion at
the Royal Palace Hotel: who has had the genius to devise and to
accomplish such terrible crimes in incredible circumstances, and
to combine audacity with skill, and a conception of evil with a
pretence of respectability; who has been able to play the Proteus
eluding all the efforts of the police;—this man, I say, ought not
to be called Gurn! He is, and can be, no other than Fantômas!"</p>
<p>The detective suddenly broke off from his long statement,
and the syllables of the melodramatic name seemed to echo
through the court, and, taken up by all those present, to swell
again into a dread murmur.</p>
<p>"Fantômas! He is Fantômas!"</p>
<p>For a space of minutes judges and jury seemed to be absorbed
in their own reflections; and then the President of the
Court made an abrupt gesture of violent dissent.</p>
<p>"M. Juve, you have just enunciated such astounding facts, and
elaborated such an appalling indictment against this man Gurn,
that I have no doubt the Public Prosecutor will ask for a supplementary
examination, which this Court will be happy to
grant, if he considers your arguments worth consideration. But
are they? I will submit three objections." Juve bowed coldly.
"First of all, M. Juve, do you believe that a man could assume
disguise with the cleverness that you have just represented?
M. Etienne Rambert is a man of sixty; Gurn is thirty-five. M.
Rambert is an elderly man, slow of movement, and the man who
robbed Princess Sonia Danidoff was a nimble, very active man."</p>
<p>"I have anticipated that objection, sir," Juve said with a smile,
"by saying that Gurn is Fantômas! Nothing is impossible for
Fantômas!"</p>
<p>"Suppose that is true," said the President with a wave of his
hand, "but what have you to say to this: you charge Etienne
Rambert with the murder of Mme. de Langrune; but do you not
know that Etienne Rambert's son, Charles Rambert, who, according
to the generally received, and most plausible, opinion
was the real murderer of the Marquise, committed suicide from
remorse? If Etienne Rambert was the guilty party, Charles
Rambert would not have taken his own life."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_261">[261]</a></span></p>
<p>Juve's voice shook a little.</p>
<p>"You would be quite right, sir, if again it were not necessary to
add that Etienne Rambert is Gurn—that is to say, Fantômas! Is
it not a possible hypothesis that Fantômas might have affected
the mind of that lad: have suggested to him that it was he who
committed the crime in a period of somnambulism: and at
last have urged him to suicide? Do you not know the power of
suggestion?"</p>
<p>"Suppose that also is true," said the President with another
vague wave of his hand. "I will only put two incontestable facts
before you. You accuse Etienne Rambert of being Gurn, and
Etienne Rambert was lost in the wreck of the <i>Lancaster</i>; you
also accuse Gurn of having murdered Dollon, and at the time
that murder was committed Gurn was in solitary confinement in
the Santé prison."</p>
<p>This time the detective made a sign as if of defeat.</p>
<p>"If I have waited until to-day to make the statement you have
just listened to, it was obviously because hitherto I have had no
absolute proofs, but merely groups of certainties. I spoke to-day,
because I could keep silent no longer; if I am still without some
explanations in detail, I am sure I shall have them some day.
Everything comes to light sooner or later. And as to the two facts
you have just put before me, I would reply that there is no proof
that M. Rambert was lost in the wreck of the <i>Lancaster</i>: it has
not been legally established that he ever was on board that ship.
Of course, I know his name was in the list of passengers, but a
child could have contrived a device of that sort. Besides, all the
circumstances attending that disaster are still an utter mystery.
My belief is that a Fantômas would be perfectly capable of causing
an explosion on a ship and blowing up a hundred and fifty
people, if thereby he could dispose of one of his identities, especially
such a terribly compromising identity as that of Etienne
Rambert."</p>
<p>The President dismissed the theory with a word.</p>
<p>"Pure romance!" he said. "And what about the murder of
Dollon? I should like, further, to remind you that the fragment
of map which, according to you, was the real reason for this<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_262">[262]</a></span>
man's death, was found on his body, and does not correspond in
the least with the hole cut in the map you found in Gurn's
rooms."</p>
<p>"As for that," Juve said with a smile, "the explanation is obvious.
If Gurn, whom I charge with the murder of Dollon, had
been content merely to abstract the real fragment, he would so
to speak have set his signature to the crime. But he was much
too clever for that: he was subtle enough to abstract the compromising
fragment and substitute another fragment for it—the
one found on the body."</p>
<p>"Perhaps," said the President; "that is possible, but I repeat,
Gurn was in prison at the time."</p>
<p>"True! True!" said Juve, throwing up his hands. "I am prepared
to swear that it was Gurn who did the murder, but I
cannot yet explain how he did it, since he was in solitary confinement
in the Santé."</p>
<p>Silence fell upon the court; Juve refrained from saying anything
more, but a sarcastic smile curled his lip.</p>
<p>"Have you anything else to say?" the President asked after a
pause.</p>
<p>"Nothing: except that anything is possible to Fantômas."</p>
<p>The President turned to the prisoner.</p>
<p>"Gurn, have you anything to say, any confession to make? The
jury will listen to you."</p>
<p>Gurn rose to his feet.</p>
<p>"I do not understand a word of what the detective has just
been saying," he said.</p>
<p>The President looked at Juve again.</p>
<p>"You suggest that there shall be a supplementary investigation?"</p>
<p>"Yes."</p>
<p>"Mr. Solicitor-General, have you any application to make on
that subject?" the President asked the Public Prosecutor.</p>
<p>"No," said the functionary. "The witness's allegations are altogether
too vague."</p>
<p>"Very well. The Court will deliberate forthwith."</p>
<p>The judges gathered round the President of the Court, and<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_263">[263]</a></span>
held a short discussion. Then they returned to their places and
the President announced their decision. It was that after consideration
of the statement of the witness Juve, their opinion
was that it rested merely upon hypotheses, and their decision
was that there was no occasion for a supplementary enquiry.</p>
<p>And the President immediately called upon the Public
Prosecutor to address the Court.</p>
<p>Neither in the lengthy address of that functionary, nor in the
ensuing address of Maître Barberoux on behalf of the defendant,
was the slightest allusion made to the fresh facts adduced
by the detective. The theories he put forward were so unexpected
and so utterly astonishing that nobody paid the least attention
to them! Then the sitting was suspended while the jury
considered their verdict. The judges retired and guards removed
the prisoner, and Juve, who had accepted the dismissal
of his application for a further enquiry with perfect equanimity,
went up to the press-box and spoke to a young journalist sitting
there.</p>
<p>"Shall we go out for a quarter of an hour, Fandor?" and when
they were presently in the corridor, he smote the young fellow
in a friendly way on the shoulder and enquired: "Well, my boy,
what do you say to all that?"</p>
<p>Jérôme Fandor seemed to be overwhelmed.</p>
<p>"You accuse my father? You really accuse Etienne Rambert of
being Gurn? Surely I am dreaming!"</p>
<p>"My dear young idiot," Juve growled, "do pray understand
one thing: I am not accusing your father, your real father, but
only the man who represented himself to be your father! Just
think: if my contention is right—that the Etienne Rambert who
killed the Marquise is Gurn—it is perfectly obvious that Gurn is
not your father, for he is only thirty-five years of age! He has
merely represented himself to be your father."</p>
<p>"Then who is my real father?"</p>
<p>"I don't know anything about that," said the detective. "That's
a matter we will look into one of these fine days! You take it from
me that we are only just at the beginning of all these things."</p>
<p>"But the Court has refused a supplementary enquiry."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_264">[264]</a></span></p>
<p>"'Gad!" said Juve, "I quite expected it would! I have not got
the proofs to satisfy the legal mind; and then, too, I had to hold
my tongue about the most interesting fact that I knew."</p>
<p>"What was that?"</p>
<p>"Why, that you are not dead, Charles Rambert! I had to conceal
that fact, my boy, for the melancholy reason that I am a
poor man and depend on my job. If I had let out that I had
known for a long time that Charles Rambert was alive when he
was supposed to be dead, and that I had known him first as
Jeanne and then as Paul, and yet had said nothing about it, I
should have been dismissed from the service as sure as eggs are
eggs—and it is equally certain that you would have been arrested;
which is precisely what I do not wish to happen!"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>In tense silence the foreman of the jury rose.</p>
<p>"In the presence of God and man, and upon my honour and
my conscience, I declare that the answer of a majority of the
jury is 'yes' to all the questions submitted to them."</p>
<p>Then he sat down: he had made no mention of extenuating
circumstances.</p>
<p>The words of the fatal verdict fell like a knell in the silent
Court of Assize, and many a face went white.</p>
<p>"Have you anything to say before sentence is passed?"</p>
<p>"Nothing," Gurn replied.</p>
<p>In rapid tones the President read the formal pronouncement
of the Court. It seemed horribly long and unintelligible, but
presently the President's voice became slower as it reached the
fatal words: there was a second's pause, and then he reached the
point:</p>
<p>"—the sentence on the prisoner Gurn is death."</p>
<p>And almost simultaneously he gave the order:</p>
<p>"Guards, take the condemned away!"</p>
<p>Juve, who had returned to court with Fandor, spoke to the
young journalist.</p>
<p>"'Gad!" he exclaimed, "I know what pluck is. That man is a
truly remarkable man: he never turned a hair!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_265">[265]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XXX. An Assignation</span></h2>
<p>The final curtain had fallen upon the first performance of the
new drama at the Grand Treteau.</p>
<p>The night had been one long triumph for Valgrand, and although
it was very late the Baronne de Vibray, who plumed herself
on being the great tragedian's dearest friend, had made her
way behind the scenes to lavish praise and congratulations on
him, and have a little triumph of her own in presenting her
friends to the hero of the hour. In vain had Charlot, the old
dresser, tried to prevent her invasion of his master's dressing-room.
He was not proof against her perseverance, and ere long
she had swept into the room with the proud smile of a general
entering a conquered town. The Comte de Baral, a tall young
man with a single eyeglass, followed close in her wake.</p>
<p>"Will you please announce us," he said to the dresser.</p>
<p>Charlot hesitated a moment in surprise, then broke into voluble
explanations.</p>
<p>"M. Valgrand is not here yet. What, didn't you know? Why, at
the end of the performance the Minister of Public Instruction
sent for him to congratulate him! That's a tremendous honour,
and it's the second time it has been paid to M. Valgrand."</p>
<p>Meanwhile the other two ladies in the party were roaming
about the dressing-room: Mme. Simone Holbord, wife of a
colonel of the Marines who had just covered himself with distinction
in the Congo, and the Comtesse Marcelline de Baral.</p>
<p>"How thrilling an actor's dressing-room is!" exclaimed Mme.
Holbord, inspecting everything in the room through her glass.
"Just look at these darling little brushes! I suppose he uses those<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_266">[266]</a></span>
in making up? And, oh, my dear! There are actually three kinds
of rouge!"</p>
<p>The Comtesse de Baral was fascinated by the photographs
adorning the walls.</p>
<p>"'To the admirable Valgrand from a comrade,'" she read in
awe-struck tones. "Come and look, dear, it is signed by Sarah
Bernhardt! And listen to this one: 'At Buenos Ayres, at
Melbourne, and New York, wherever I am I hear the praises of
my friend Valgrand!'"</p>
<p>"Something like a globe-trotter!" said Mme. Holbord. "I expect
he belongs to the Comédie Française."</p>
<p>Colonel Holbord interrupted, calling to his wife.</p>
<p>"Simone, come and listen to what our friend de Baral is
telling me: it is really very curious."</p>
<p>The young woman approached, and the Comte began again
for her benefit.</p>
<p>"You have come back too recently from the Congo to be up to
date with all our Paris happenings, and so you will not have noticed
this little touch, but in the part that he created to-night
Valgrand made himself up exactly like Gurn, the man who murdered
Lord Beltham!"</p>
<p>"Gurn?" said Mme. Holbord, to whom the name did not convey
much. "Oh, yes, I think I read about that: the murderer escaped,
didn't he?"</p>
<p>"Well, they took a long time to find him," the Comte de Baral
replied. "As usual, the police were giving up all hope of finding
him, when one day, or rather one night, they did find him and
arrested him; and where do you suppose that was? Why, with
Lady Beltham! Yes, really: in her own house at Neuilly!"</p>
<p>"Impossible!" cried Simone Holbord. "Poor woman! What an
awful shock for her!"</p>
<p>"Lady Beltham is a brave, dignified, and truly charitable
woman," said the Comtesse de Baral. "She simply worshipped
her husband. And yet, she pleaded warmly for mercy for the
murderer—though she did not succeed in getting it."</p>
<p>"What a dreadful thing!" said Simone Holbord perfunctorily;
her attention was wandering to all the other attractions in this<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_267">[267]</a></span>
attractive room. A pile of letters was lying on a writing-table,
and the reckless young woman began to look at the envelopes.
"Just look at this pile of letters!" she cried. "How funny! Every
one of them in a woman's hand! I suppose Valgrand gets all sorts
of offers?"</p>
<p>Colonel Holbord went on talking to the Comte de Baral in a
corner of the room.</p>
<p>"I am enormously interested in what you tell me. What happened
then?"</p>
<p>"Well, this wretch, Gurn, was recognised by the police as he
was leaving Lady Beltham's, and was arrested and put in prison.
The trial came on at the Court of Assize about six weeks ago. All
Paris went to it, of course including myself! This man Gurn is a
brute, but a strange brute, rather difficult to define; he swore
that he had killed Lord Beltham after a quarrel, practically for
the sake of robbing him, but I had a strong impression that he
was lying."</p>
<p>"But why else should he have committed the murder?"</p>
<p>The Comte de Baral shrugged his shoulders.</p>
<p>"Nobody knows," he said: "politics, perhaps, nihilism, or perhaps
again—love. There was one fact, or coincidence, worth
noting: when Lady Beltham came home from the Transvaal
after the war, during which, by the way, she did splendid work
among the sick and wounded, she sailed by the same boat that
was taking Gurn to England. Gurn also was a bit of a popular
hero just then: he had volunteered at the beginning of the war,
and came back with a sergeant's stripes and a medal for distinguished
conduct. Can Gurn and Lady Beltham have met and
got to know each other? It is certain that the lady's behaviour
during the trial lent itself to comment, if not exactly to scandal.
She had odd collapses in the presence of the murderer, collapses
which were accounted for in very various ways. Some
people said that she was half out of her mind with grief at the
loss of her husband; others said that if she was mad, it was over
someone, over this vulgar criminal—martyr or accomplice, perhaps.
They even went so far as to allege that Lady Beltham had
an intrigue with Gurn!"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_268">[268]</a></span></p>
<p>"Come! come!" the Colonel protested: "a great lady like Lady
Beltham, so religious and so austere? Absurd!"</p>
<p>"People say all sorts of things," said the Comte de Baral
vaguely. He turned to another subject. "Anyhow, the case
caused a tremendous sensation; Gurn's condemnation to death
was very popular, and the case was so typically Parisian that our
friend Valgrand, knowing that he was going to create the part of
the murderer in this tragedy to-night, followed every phase of
the Gurn trial closely, studied the man in detail, and literally
identified himself with him in this character. It was a shrewd
idea. You noticed the sensation when he came on the stage?"</p>
<p>"Yes, I did," said the Colonel; "I wondered what the exclamations
from all over the house meant."</p>
<p>"Try to find a portrait of Gurn in some one of the illustrated
papers," said the Comte, "and compare it with—— Ah, I think
this is Valgrand coming!"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>The Baronne de Vibray had tired of her conversation with the
old dresser, Charlot, and had left him to take up her stand outside
the dressing-room, where she greeted with nods and smiles
the other actors and actresses as they hurried by on their way
home, and listened to the sounds at the end of the passage.
Presently a voice became distinguishable, the voice of Valgrand
singing a refrain from a musical comedy. The Baronne de Vibray
hurried to meet him, with both hands outstretched, and led him
into his dressing-room.</p>
<p>"Let me present M. Valgrand!" she exclaimed, and then presented
the two young women to the bowing actor: "Comtesse
Marcelline de Baral, Mme. Holbord."</p>
<p>"Pardon me, ladies, for keeping you waiting," the actor said. "I
was deep in conversation with the Minister. He was so charming,
so kind!" He turned to the Baronne de Vibray. "He did me the honour
to offer me a cigarette! A relic! Charlot! Charlot! You must
put this cigarette in the little box where all my treasures are!"</p>
<p>"It is very full already, M. Valgrand," said Charlot deprecatingly.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_269">[269]</a></span></p>
<p>"We must not keep you long," the Baronne de Vibray murmured.
"You must be very tired."</p>
<p>Valgrand passed a weary hand across his brow.</p>
<p>"Positively exhausted!" Then he raised his head and looked at
the company. "What did you think of me?"</p>
<p>A chorus of eulogy sprang from every lip.</p>
<p>"Splendid!" "Wonderful!" "The very perfection of art!"</p>
<p>"No, but really?" protested Valgrand, swelling with satisfied
vanity. "Tell me candidly: was it really good?"</p>
<p>"You really were wonderful: could not have been better," the
Baronne de Vibray exclaimed enthusiastically, and the crowd of
worshippers endorsed every word, until the artist was convinced
that their praise was quite sincere.</p>
<p>"How I have worked!" he exclaimed: "do you know, when rehearsals
began—ask Charlot if this isn't true—the piece simply
didn't exist!"</p>
<p>"Simply didn't exist!" Charlot corroborated him, like an echo.</p>
<p>"Didn't exist," Valgrand repeated: "not even my part. It was
insignificant, flat! So I took the author aside and I said: 'Frantz,
my boy, I'll tell you what you must do: you know the lawyer's
speech? Absurd! What am I to do while he is delivering it? I'll
make the speech for my own defence, and I'll get something out
of it!' And the prison scene! Just fancy, he had shoved a parson
into that! I said to Frantz: 'Cut the parson out, my boy: what the
dickens am I to do while he is preaching? Simply nothing at all:
it's absurd. Give his speech to me! I'll preach to myself!' And
there you are: I don't want to boast, but really I did it all! And it
was a success, eh?"</p>
<p>Again the chorus broke out, to be stopped by Valgrand, who
was contemplating his reflection in a mirror.</p>
<p>"And my make-up, Colonel? Do you know the story of my
make-up? I hear they were talking about it all over the house.
Am I like Gurn? What do you think? You saw him quite close at
the trial, Comte: what do you think?"</p>
<p>"The resemblance is perfectly amazing," said the Comte de
Baral with perfect truth.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_270">[270]</a></span></p>
<p>The actor stroked his face mechanically: a new idea struck
him.</p>
<p>"My beard is a real one," he exclaimed. "I let it grow on purpose.
I hardly had to make myself up at all; I am the same build,
the same type, same profile; it was ridiculously easy!"</p>
<p>"Give me a lock of hair from your beard for a locket," said the
Baronne de Vibray impudently.</p>
<p>Valgrand looked at her, and heaved a profound sigh.</p>
<p>"Not yet, not yet, dear lady: I am infinitely sorry, but not yet:
a little later on, perhaps; wait for the hundredth performance."</p>
<p>"I must have one too," said Simone Holbord, and Valgrand
with great dignity replied:</p>
<p>"I will put your name down for one, madame!"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>But the Comte de Baral had looked furtively at his watch, and
uttered an exclamation of surprise.</p>
<p>"My good people, it is most horribly late! And our great
artiste must be overcome with sleep!"</p>
<p>Forthwith they all prepared to depart, in spite of the actor's
courteous protests that he could not hear of letting them go so
soon. They lingered at the door for a few minutes in eager, animated
conversation, shaking hands and exchanging farewells
and thanks and congratulations. Then the sound of their footsteps
died away along the corridors, and the Baronne de Vibray
and her friends left the theatre. Valgrand turned back into his
dressing-room and locked the door, then dropped into the low
and comfortable chair that was set before his dressing-table.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>He remained there resting for a few minutes, and then sat up
and threw a whimsical glance at his dresser who was putting out
his ordinary clothes.</p>
<p>"Hang it all, Charlot! What's exhaustion? The mere sight of
such jewels as those enchanting women would wake one from
the dead!"</p>
<p>Charlot shrugged his shoulders.</p>
<p>"Will you never be serious, M. Valgrand?"</p>
<p>"Heavens, I hope not!" exclaimed the actor. "I hope not, for if<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_271">[271]</a></span>
there is one thing of which one never tires here below, it is
Woman, the peerless rainbow that illuminates this vale of tears!"</p>
<p>"You are very poetical to-night," the dresser remarked.</p>
<p>"I am a lover—in love with love! Oh, Love, Love! And in my
time, you know——" He made a sweeping, comprehensive gesture,
and came back abruptly to mundane affairs. "Come, help
me to dress."</p>
<p>Charlot offered him a bundle of letters, which Valgrand took
with careless hand. He looked at the envelopes one after another,
hugely amused.</p>
<p>"Violet ink, and monograms, and coronets, and—perfume.
Say, Charlot, is this a proposal? What do you bet?"</p>
<p>"You never have anything else," the dresser grumbled "—except
bills."</p>
<p>"Do you bet?"</p>
<p>"If you insist, I bet it is a bill; then you will win," said Charlot.</p>
<p>"Done!" cried Valgrand. "Listen," and he began to declaim
the letter aloud: "'Oh, wondrous genius, a flower but now unclosing'—— Got
it, Charlot? Another of them!" He tore open
another envelope. "Ah-ha! Photograph enclosed, and will I send
it back if the original is not to my fancy!" He flung himself back
in his chair to laugh. "Where is my collar?" He picked up a third
envelope. "What will you bet that this violet envelope does not
contain another tribute to my fatal beauty?"</p>
<p>"I bet it is another bill," said the dresser; "but you are sure to
win."</p>
<p>"I have," Valgrand replied, and again declaimed the written
words: "'if you promise to be discreet, and true, you shall never
regret it.' Does one ever regret it—even if one does not keep
one's promises?"</p>
<p>"At lovers' perjuries——" Charlot quoted.</p>
<p>"Drunken promises!" Valgrand retorted. "By the way, I am
dying for a drink. Give me a whisky and soda." He got up and
moved to the table on which Charlot had set decanters and
glasses, and was about to take the glass the dresser offered him
when a tap on the door brought the conversation to a sudden
stop. The actor frowned: he did not want to be bothered by<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_272">[272]</a></span>
more visitors. But curiosity got the better of his annoyance and
he told Charlot to see who it was.</p>
<p>Charlot went to the door and peered through a narrow opening
at the thoughtless intruder.</p>
<p>"Fancy making all this bother over a letter!" he growled.
"Urgent? Of course: they always are urgent," and he shut the
door on the messenger and gave the letter to Valgrand. "A
woman brought it," he said.</p>
<p>Valgrand looked at it.</p>
<p>"H'm! Mourning! Will you bet, Charlot?"</p>
<p>"Deep mourning," said Charlot: "then I bet it is a declaration.
I expect you will win again, for very likely it is a begging letter.
Black edges stir compassion."</p>
<p>Valgrand was reading the letter, carelessly to begin with, then
with deep attention. He reached the signature at the end, and
then read it through again, aloud this time, punctuating his
reading with flippant comments: "'In creating the part of the
criminal in the tragedy to-night, you made yourself up into a
most marvellous likeness of Gurn, the man who murdered Lord
Beltham. Come to-night, at two o'clock, <i>in your costume</i>, to 22
rue Messier. Take care not to be seen, but come. Someone who
loves you is waiting for you there.'"</p>
<p>"And it is signed——?" said the dresser.</p>
<p>"That, my boy, I'm not going to tell you," said Valgrand, and
he put the letter carefully into his pocket-book. "Why, man,
what are you up to?" he added, as the dresser came up to him
to take his clothes.</p>
<p>"Up to?" the servant exclaimed: "I am only helping you to get
your things off."</p>
<p>"Idiot!" laughed Valgrand. "Didn't you understand? Give me
my black tie and villain's coat again."</p>
<p>"What on earth is the matter with you?" Charlot asked with
some uneasiness. "Surely you are not thinking of going?"</p>
<p>"Not going? Why, in the whole of my career as amorist, I have
never had such an opportunity before!"</p>
<p>"It may be a hoax."</p>
<p>"Take my word for it, I know better. Things like this aren't<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_273">[273]</a></span>
hoaxes. Besides, I know the—the lady. She has often been
pointed out to me: and at the trial—— By Jove, Charlot, she is
the most enchanting woman in the world: strangely lovely, infinitely
distinguished, absolutely fascinating!"</p>
<p>"You are raving like a schoolboy."</p>
<p>"So much the better for me! Why, I was half dead with fatigue,
and now I am myself again. Be quick, booby! My hat!
Time is getting on. Where is it?"</p>
<p>"Where is what?" the bewildered Charlot asked.</p>
<p>"Why, this place," Valgrand answered irritably: "this rue
Messier. Look it up in the directory."</p>
<p>Valgrand stamped impatiently up and down the room while
Charlot hurriedly turned over the pages of the directory, muttering
the syllables at the top of each as he ran through them in
alphabetical order.</p>
<p>"J ... K ... L ... M ... Ma ... Me ...—Why, M. Valgrand——"</p>
<p>"What's the matter?"</p>
<p>"Why, it is the street where the prison is!"</p>
<p>"The Santé? Where Gurn is—in the condemned cell?"
Valgrand cocked his hat rakishly on one side. "And I have an
assignation at the prison?"</p>
<p>"Not exactly, but not far off: right opposite; yes, number 22
must be right opposite."</p>
<p>"Right opposite the prison!" Valgrand exclaimed gaily. "The
choice of the spot, and the desire to see me in my costume as
Gurn, are evidence of a positive refinement in sensation! See?
The lady, and I—the counterpart of Gurn—and, right opposite,
the real Gurn in his cell! Quick, man: my cloak! My cane!"</p>
<p>"Do think, sir," Charlot protested: "it is absolutely absurd! A
man like you——"</p>
<p>"A man like me," Valgrand roared, "would keep an appointment
like this if he had to walk on his head to get there! Good-night!"
and carolling gaily, Valgrand strode down the corridor.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Charlot was accustomed to these wild vagaries on his master's
part, for Valgrand was the most daring and inveterate rake it is<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_274">[274]</a></span>
possible to imagine. But while he was tidying up the litter in the
room, after Valgrand had left him, the dresser shook his head.</p>
<p>"What a pity it is! And he such a great artiste! These women
will make an absolute fool of him! Why, he hasn't even taken his
gloves or his scarf!" There was a tap at the door, and the door-keeper
looked in.</p>
<p>"Can I turn out the lights?" he enquired. "Has M. Valgrand
gone?"</p>
<p>"Yes," said the dresser absently, "he has gone."</p>
<p>"A great night," said the door-keeper. "Have you seen the last
edition of the <i>Capitale</i>, the eleven o'clock edition? There's a notice
of us already. The papers don't lose any time nowadays.
They say it is a great success."</p>
<p>"Let's look at it," said the dresser, and, glancing through the
notice, added, "yes, that's quite true: 'M. Valgrand has achieved
his finest triumph in his last creation.'" He looked casually
through the newspaper, and suddenly broke into a sharp exclamation.
"Good heavens, it can't be possible!"</p>
<p>"What's the matter?" the door-keeper enquired.</p>
<p>Charlot pointed a shaking finger to another column.</p>
<p>"Read that, Jean, read that! Surely I am mistaken."</p>
<p>The door-keeper peered over Charlot's shoulder at the indicated
passage.</p>
<p>"I don't see anything in that; it's that Gurn affair again. Yes, he
is to be executed at daybreak on the eighteenth."</p>
<p>"But that is this morning—presently," Charlot exclaimed.</p>
<p>"May be," said the door-keeper indifferently; "yes, last night
was the seventeenth, so it is the eighteenth now! Are you ill,
Charlot?"</p>
<p>Charlot pulled himself together.</p>
<p>"No, it's nothing; I'm only tired. You can put out the lights. I
shall be out of the theatre in five minutes; I only want to do one
or two little things here."</p>
<p>"All right," said Jean, turning away. "Shut the door behind you
when you leave, if I have gone to bed."</p>
<p>Charlot sat on the arm of a chair and wiped his brow.</p>
<p>"I don't like this business," he muttered. "Why the deuce did<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_275">[275]</a></span>
he want to go? What does this woman want with him? I may be
only an old fool, but I know what I know, and there have been
no end of queer stories about this job already." He sat there
meditating, till an idea took shape in his mind. "Can I dare to go
round there and just prowl about? Of course he will be furious,
but suppose that letter was a decoy and he is walking into a trap?
One never can tell. An assignation in that particular street, with
that prison opposite, and Gurn to be guillotined within the next
hour or so?" The man made up his mind, hurriedly put on his
coat and hat, and switched off the electric lights in the exquisitely
appointed dressing-room. "I'll go!" he said aloud. "If I see
anything suspicious, or if at the end of half an hour I don't see
M. Valgrand leaving the house—well!" Charlot turned the key
in the lock. "Yes, I will go. I shall be much easier in my mind!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_276">[276]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XXXI. Fell Treachery</span></h2>
<p>Number 22 rue Messier was a wretched one-storeyed house
that belonged to a country vine-dresser who seldom came
to Paris. It was damp, dirty, and dilapidated, and would have had
to be rebuilt from top to bottom if it were to be rendered habitable.
There had been a long succession of so-called tenants of
this hovel, shady, disreputable people who, for the most part,
left without paying any rent, the landlord being only too glad if
occasionally they left behind them a little miserable furniture or
worn out kitchen utensils. He was finding it ever more difficult
to let the wretched house, and for weeks together it had remained
unoccupied. But one day, about a month ago, he had
been astonished by receiving an application for the tenancy
from someone who vaguely signed himself Durand; and still further
astonished by finding in the envelope bank-notes representing
a year's rent in advance. Delighted with this windfall,
and congratulating himself on not having gone to the expense of
putting the hovel into something like repair—unnecessary now,
since he had secured a tenant, and a good one, for at least twelve
months—the landlord promptly sent a receipt to this Durand,
with the keys, and thought no more about the matter.</p>
<p>In the principal room, on the first floor of this hovel, a little
poor furniture had been put; a shabby sofa, an equally shabby
arm-chair, a few cane-bottomed chairs, and a deal table. On the
table was a tea-pot, a small kettle over a spirit-stove, and a few
cups and small cakes. A smoky lamp shed a dim light over this
depressing interior, and a handful of coal was smouldering in the
cracked grate.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_277">[277]</a></span></p>
<p>And here, in these miserable surroundings, Lady Beltham
was installed on this eighteenth of December.</p>
<p>The great lady was even paler than usual, and her eyes shone
with a curious brilliance. That she was suffering from the most
acute and feverish nervous excitement was patent from the way
in which she kept putting her hands to her heart as though the
violence of its throbbing were unendurable, and from the restless
way in which she paced the room, stopping at every other
step to listen for some sound to reach her through the silence of
the night. Once she stepped quickly from the middle of the
room to the wall opposite the door that opened on to the staircase;
she pushed ajar the door of a small cupboard and murmured
"hush," making a warning movement with her hands, as
if addressing someone concealed there; then she moved forward
again and, sinking on to the sofa, pressed her hands against her
throbbing temples.</p>
<p>"No one yet!" she murmured presently. "Oh, I would give ten
years of my life to——! Is all really lost?" Her eyes wandered
round the room. "What a forbidding, squalid place!" and again
she sprang to her feet and paced the room. Through the grimy
panes of the window she could just see a long row of roofs and
chimneys outlined against the sky. "Oh, those black roofs, those
horrible black roofs!" she muttered. The already wretched light
in the wretched room was burning dimmer, and Lady Beltham
turned up the wick of the lamp. As she did so she caught a sound
and stopped. "Can that be he?" she exclaimed, and hurried to
the door. "Footsteps—and a man's footsteps!"</p>
<p>The next moment she was sure. Someone stumbled in the
passage below, came slowly up the stairs, was on the landing.</p>
<p>Lady Beltham recoiled to the sofa and sank down on it, turning
her back to the door, and hiding her face in her hands.</p>
<p>"Valgrand!"</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Valgrand was a man with a passion for adventure. But invariable
success in his flirtations had made him blasé, and now it
was only the absolutely novel that could appeal to him. And
there could certainly be no question about the woman who had<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_278">[278]</a></span>
sent him the present invitation being anything but a commonplace
one! Moreover, it was not just any woman who had asked
him to keep this assignation in the outward guise of Gurn, but
the one woman in whose heart the murderer ought to inspire
the greatest abhorrence, the widow of the man whom Gurn had
murdered. What should his deportment be when he came face
to face with her? That was what preoccupied the actor as he left
the theatre, and made him dismiss the taxi in which he had
started, before he reached his destination.</p>
<p>Valgrand came into the room slowly, and with a trained eye
for effect. He flung his cloak and hat theatrically on the arm-chair,
and moved towards Lady Beltham, who still sat motionless
with her face hidden in her hands.</p>
<p>"I have come!" he said in deep tones.</p>
<p>Lady Beltham uttered a little exclamation as if of surprise,
and seemed even more anxious to hide from him.</p>
<p>"Odd!" thought Valgrand. "She seems to be really upset; what
can I say to her, I wonder?"</p>
<p>But Lady Beltham made a great effort and sat up, looking at
the actor with strained eyes, yet striving to force a smile.</p>
<p>"Thank you for coming, sir," she murmured.</p>
<p>"It is not from you, madame, that the thanks should come,"
Valgrand answered magnificently; "quite the reverse; I am infinitely
grateful to you for having summoned me. Pray believe
that I would have been here even sooner but for the delay inevitable
on a first performance. But you are cold," he broke off,
for Lady Beltham was shivering.</p>
<p>"Yes, I am," she said almost inaudibly, mechanically pulling a
scarf over her shoulders. Valgrand was standing, taking in every
detail of the squalid room in which he found himself with this
woman whose wealth, and taste, and sumptuous home at
Neuilly were notorious.</p>
<p>"I must clear up this mystery," he thought, while he moved to
the window to see that it was shut, and searched about, in vain,
for a little coal to put upon the fire. While he was thus occupied
Lady Beltham also rose, and going to the table poured out two
cups of tea.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_279">[279]</a></span></p>
<p>"Perhaps this will warm us, in the absence of anything better,"
she said, making an effort to seem more amiable. "I am afraid it
is rather strong, M. Valgrand; I hope you do not mind?" and,
with a hand that trembled as if it held a heavy weight, she
brought one of the cups to her guest.</p>
<p>"Tea never upsets me, madame," Valgrand replied as he took
the cup. "Indeed, I like it." He came to the table and picked up
the basin filled with castor sugar, making first as if to put some
in her cup.</p>
<p>"Thanks, I never take sugar in tea," she said.</p>
<p>Valgrand made a little grimace. "I admire you, but I will not
imitate you," he said, and unceremoniously tipped a generous
helping of the sugar into his own cup.</p>
<p>Lady Beltham watched him with haggard eyes.</p>
<p>While they were sipping their tea, there was silence between
them. Lady Beltham went back to the sofa, and Valgrand took a
chair quite close to her. The conversation was certainly lacking
in animation, he reflected whimsically; would the lady succeed
in reducing him to the level of intelligence of a callow schoolboy?
And she most certainly did seem to be horribly upset.
He raised his eyes to her and found that she was gazing into
infinity.</p>
<p>"One has got to draw upon psychology here," Valgrand
mused. "It is not me, myself, in whom this lovely creature takes
any interest, or she would not have desired me to come in these
trappings that make me look like Gurn; it's his skin that I must
stop in! But what is the proper attitude to adopt? The sentimental?
Or the brutal? Or shall I appeal to her proselytising
mania, and do the repentant sinner act? I'll chance it; here
goes!" and he rose to his feet.</p>
<p>As he moved, Lady Beltham looked round, uneasy, frightened,
almost anguished: it seemed as though she realised that
the moment had come for extraordinary things to happen.</p>
<p>Valgrand began to speak as he did upon the stage, restraining
his effects at first and controlling his voice of set purpose to give
full effect to it later on, modulating it cleverly.</p>
<p>"At your summons, madame, the prisoner Gurn has burst his<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_280">[280]</a></span>
bonds, broken through the door of his cell, and scaled his prison
walls, triumphing over every obstacle with the single object of
coming to your feet. He comes——" and he took a step nearer
to her.</p>
<p>Lady Beltham stayed him with a gesture of terror.</p>
<p>"Don't! Don't! Please say no more!" she murmured.</p>
<p>"I've got a bite," Valgrand said to himself. "Let's try another
bait," and as if repeating a part he said dramatically: "Has your
charitable heart turned towards the guilty soul that you fain
would rescue from transgression? Men say you are so great a
lady, so good, so near to heaven!"</p>
<p>Again Lady Beltham put up a protesting hand.</p>
<p>"Not that! Not that!" she said imploringly. "Oh, this is torture;
go away!"</p>
<p>In her distress she was really superbly beautiful; but Valgrand
knew too much about women of every temperament, neurotic,
hysterical, and many another kind, not to suppose that here he
was merely taking part in a sentimental comedy. He made a
rough gesture and laid his hand on Lady Beltham's arm.</p>
<p>"Do you not know me?" he said harshly. "I am Gurn! I will
crush you to my heart!" and he tried to draw her close to him.</p>
<p>But this time Lady Beltham threw him off with the violence
of despair. "Stand back! You brute!" she cried, in tones that
there was no mistaking.</p>
<p>Valgrand recoiled in real dismay, and stood silent in the middle
of the room, while Lady Beltham went to the wall farthest
from him and leaned for support against it.</p>
<p>"Listen, madame," Valgrand began presently, in dulcet tones
that had the effect of making Lady Beltham try to control her
emotion and murmur some faint words of apology. "Of course
you know I am Valgrand, Valgrand the actor; I will apologise for
having come to you like this, but I have some small excuse in
your note!"</p>
<p>"My note?" she murmured. "Oh, yes; I forgot!"</p>
<p>Valgrand went on, seeming to pick his words.</p>
<p>"You have overestimated your strength, and now perhaps you
find the resemblance too startling? Do not be frightened. But<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_281">[281]</a></span>
your letter came to me like healing balm upon a quivering
wound. For weeks, long weeks——" The actor stopped, and mechanically
rubbed his eyes. "It's odd," he thought to himself,
"but I feel ever so much more inclined to go to sleep than to
make love." He shook off his real desire for sleep and began
again. "I have loved you since the day I saw you first. I love you
with an intensity——"</p>
<p>For some moments Lady Beltham had been looking at him
with a calmer air, and eyes that were less hostile. The old amorist
observed it, and made a tremendous effort to overcome his
most inopportune drowsiness.</p>
<p>"How shall I be silent, when at last kind heaven is about to
grant the fondest desire of my heart? When, all afire with love,
I am kneeling at your feet?"</p>
<p>Valgrand dropped to his knees. Lady Beltham drew herself
up, listening. In the distance a clock struck four.</p>
<p>"Oh, I can bear it no longer!" she cried stammeringly. "I can
bear no more! Listen; four o'clock! No, no! It is too much, too
much for me!" The woman seemed absolutely frantic. She
paced up and down the room like a caged animal. Then she
came close to Valgrand, and looked at him with an immense pity
in her eyes. "Go, sir; if you believe in God, go away! Go as
quickly as you can!"</p>
<p>Valgrand struggled to his feet. His head was heavy, and he
had an irresistible desire to hold his tongue and just stay
where he was. Partly from gallantry and partly from his desire
not to move, he murmured, not without a certain aptness:
"I believe only in the god of love, madame, and he bids me
remain!"</p>
<p>In vain did Lady Beltham make every effort to rouse the actor
and induce him to go away; in vain were all her frantic appeals
to him to fly.</p>
<p>"I will stay," was all he said, and he dropped heavily on the
sofa by Lady Beltham's side, and mechanically tried to put his
arm round her.</p>
<p>"Listen!" she began, freeing herself from him: "in heavens
name you must—— And yet, I cannot tell you! Oh, it is horrible!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_282">[282]</a></span>
I am going mad! How am I to choose! What am I to do!
Which——? Oh, go—go—go! There is not a minute to lose!"</p>
<p>"I will stay!" said Valgrand again; this amazing drowsiness was
gaining on him so fast that he had but one desire left—for sleep!
Surely a strange assignation, this, and a poor kind of lover, too!</p>
<p>Lady Beltham stopped her torrent of appeal, and looked at
the actor crumpled up beside her. Suddenly she started and listened:
a slight noise became audible, coming from the staircase.
Lady Beltham stood erect and rigid: then dropped to her knees
upon the floor.</p>
<p>"Oh! It is all over!" she sobbed.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>In spite of his overwhelming longing for sleep, Valgrand suddenly
started. Two heavy hands fell on his shoulder, and then his
arms were pulled behind him and his wrists rapidly bound
together.</p>
<p>"Good God!" he cried, in stupefied surprise, turning quickly
round. Two men stood before him, old soldiers by the look of
them, in dark uniforms relieved only by the gleam of metal buttons.
He was going to say more, but one of the men laid his hand
over his lips.</p>
<p>"Hush!" he said peremptorily.</p>
<p>Valgrand made frantic efforts to prevent himself from falling.</p>
<p>"What does this mean? Let me go! What right——"</p>
<p>The two men began to drag him gently away.</p>
<p>"Come along," said one of them in his ear. "Time's up. Don't
be obstinate."</p>
<p>"Besides, you know it's quite useless to resist, Gurn," the
other added, not unkindly. "Nothing in the world could——"</p>
<p>"I don't understand," Valgrand protested feebly. "Who are
you? And why do you call me Gurn?"</p>
<p>"Let me finish," growled one of the men irritably. "You know
we are running an awful risk in getting you out of the prison and
bringing you here when you are supposed to be with the chaplain;
you swore you would behave squarely with us and go back
when you were told. Now you've got to keep your promise."</p>
<p>"The lady paid us well to give you an hour with her," the other<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_283">[283]</a></span>
man put in, "but you've had more than an hour and a half, and
we've got our characters and our situations to look after. So now,
come along, Gurn, and don't let us have any nonsense."</p>
<p>Valgrand, fighting hard against his overpowering sleepiness,
began to have some vague comprehension of what was happening.
He recognised the uniforms, and guessed that the men
were prison warders.</p>
<p>"Good God!" he exclaimed thickly, "the fools think I am
Gurn! But I am not Gurn! Ask——" He cast a despairing eye at
Lady Beltham who throughout the awful scene remained on her
knees in a corner of the room, dumb with anguish, apparently
deaf and turned to stone. "Tell them, madame," he implored
her. "Oh, God save me!" but still the warders dragged him towards
the door. By an herculean effort he swayed them back
with him into the middle of the room. "I am not Gurn, I tell
you," he shouted. "I am Valgrand, Valgrand the actor.
Everybody in the world knows me. You know it too, but—— Search
me, I tell you," and he made a sign with his head towards
his left side. "Look in my pocket-book; my name's inside; and
you'll find a letter too; proof of the trap I've been led into: the
letter from that woman over there!"</p>
<p>"Better look and see, Nibet," one warder said to the other,
and to Valgrand he added: "Not so much noise, man! Do you
mean to get us all caught?"</p>
<p>Nibet passed a quick hand through Valgrand's pockets; there
was no note-book there. He shrugged his shoulders.</p>
<p>"Besides, what about it?" he growled. "We brought Gurn
here, didn't we? Well, we've got to take Gurn back again. That's
all I know. Come on!"</p>
<p>Beaten down by the drowsiness that was quite irresistible,
and worn out by his violent but futile efforts to resist the
warders, Valgrand was half dragged, half carried out by the two
men, his head drooping on his chest, his consciousness failing.
But still as they were getting him down the stairs his voice could
be heard in the half-dark room above, bleating more weakly and
at longer intervals:</p>
<p>"I am not Gurn! I am not Gurn!"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_284">[284]</a></span></p>
<p>Once more silence reigned in the room. After the three men
had gone, Lady Beltham rose to her feet, tottered to the window,
and stood there listening. She heard their footsteps crossing
the street and stopping by the door into the prison. She
waited for a few minutes to make sure that they had escaped unnoticed
from their amazing adventure, then turned again to the
sofa, struggled to unfasten the collar of her dress to get more air,
drew a few deep sighs, and swooned.</p>
<p>The door opposite the staircase opened slowly, and noiselessly
Gurn emerged from the darkness and went towards Lady
Beltham. The murderer flung himself at her feet, covered her
face with kisses, and pressed her hands in his.</p>
<p>"Maud!" he called. "Maud!"</p>
<p>She did not answer and he hunted about the room for something
to revive her. Presently, however, she recovered consciousness
unaided and uttered a faint sigh. Her lover hurried to
her.</p>
<p>"Oh, Gurn," she murmured, laying her white hand on the
wretch's neck: "it's you, dear! Come close to me, and hold me in
your arms! It was too much for me! I almost broke down and
told everything! I could have borne no more. Oh, what an appalling
time!" She sat up sharply, her face drawn with terror.
"Listen: I can hear him still!"</p>
<p>"Try not to think about it," Gurn whispered, caressing her.</p>
<p>"Did you hear him, how he kept on saying 'I am not Gurn! I
am not Gurn!' Oh, heaven grant they may not find that out!"</p>
<p>Gurn himself was shaken by the horror of the plot he had
contrived with his mistress to effect this substitution of another
for himself; it surpassed in ghastliness anything that had gone
before, and he had not dared to give the least hint of it to Nibet.</p>
<p>"The warders were well paid," he said to reassure her now.
"They would deny everything." He hesitated a second, and then
asked: "He drank the drug, didn't he?"</p>
<p>Lady Beltham nodded assent.</p>
<p>"It will take effect. It was acting already: so rapidly, that I
thought for a moment he would fall unconscious there, at my
feet!"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_285">[285]</a></span></p>
<p>Gurn drew a deep breath.</p>
<p>"Maud, we are saved!" he exclaimed. "See," he went on, "as
soon as it is light, and there are enough people in the street for
us to mix with them unobserved, we will go away from here.
While you were with—him—— I burned my other clothes, so I
will take these to get away in." He picked up the hat and cloak
which Valgrand had thrown upon the chair, and wrapped the
heavy cloak around himself. "This will conceal me effectively."</p>
<p>"Let us go at once!" Lady Beltham exclaimed, but Gurn
stayed her.</p>
<p>"I must get rid of this beard, and my moustache," he said, and
he took a pair of scissors from his pocket and was walking towards
a looking-glass when suddenly they both heard the distinct
sound of footsteps coming slowly and steadily up the stairs.
Gurn had no time to get back to his former hiding-place; all he
could do was to sink into the one arm-chair that was in the
room, and conceal his features as well as he could by turning
down the brim of the hat and turning up the collar of the cloak
which the actor had forgotten. The man went as white as a
sheet, but Lady Beltham appeared to recover all her presence
of mind, and strength, and daring, at the approach of danger,
and she hurried to the door. But though she tried to keep it shut,
it slowly turned upon the hinges, and a timid, hesitating figure
appeared in the doorway and advanced towards the retreating
woman.</p>
<p>"Who are you? What do you want?" Lady Beltham faltered.</p>
<p>"I beg you to excuse me, madame," the man began, "I came
to——" He caught sight of Gurn and pointed to him. "M.
Valgrand knows me well. I am Charlot, his dresser at the theatre,
and I came to—I wanted to have a word—stay——" he
took a small square parcel from his pocket. "M. Valgrand went
off so hurriedly that he forgot his pocket-book, and so I came to
bring it to him." The dresser was trying to get near the murderer,
whom he supposed to be his master, but Lady Beltham,
in the most acute anxiety, kept between the two men. Charlot
misunderstood her intention. "I also came to——" He stopped
again and whispered to Lady Beltham. "He does not speak: is he<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_286">[286]</a></span>
very angry with me for coming? I didn't come out of curiosity, or
to cause you any trouble, madame; will you ask him not to be
very angry with his poor old Charlot?"</p>
<p>Lady Beltham felt like swooning again; she could endure very
little of this old man's garrulity.</p>
<p>"Go, for goodness' sake, go," she said peremptorily.</p>
<p>"I am going," Charlot said; "I know I am in the way; but I
must explain to him," and he raised his voice and spoke to Gurn,
who sat quite still, sinking as far as he could into the shadow of
the chair. "You are not very angry with me, M. Valgrand, are
you?" and getting no reply he looked apologetically at Lady
Beltham. "It was all these stories, and then the street, and the
prison opposite: but perhaps you do not know; you see, I read in
the paper yesterday, or rather to-night, a couple of hours ago,
that that man Gurn, who murdered the rich English gentleman,
was to be executed this morning. And so I was rather what you
might call uneasy; at first I only meant to follow M. Valgrand
and wait for him down below, but I lost my way and I have only
just arrived; I found the door open, and as I did not know
whether he had gone or was still here, I took the liberty to come
upstairs. But I am going now, quite easy in my mind, since he is
quiet and happy here with you. And I beg your pardon,
madame." He threw a last appeal to where Gurn sat. "I hope
you will forgive me, M. Valgrand?" He sighed as no answer was
forthcoming, and made a pathetic little appeal to Lady Beltham.
"You will explain to him, madame, won't you? He is a kind master,
and he will understand. One does get fancies like that, you
know. But now I will go away easy, quite easy in my mind, since
I have seen him."</p>
<p>Charlot turned away slowly, with bent shoulders. As he passed
the window he glanced outside and stopped short. Day was just
beginning to break, making the wan light of the street lamps still
more wan. From the window a view could be obtained of a kind
of platform at the corner of the boulevard Arago which was
bounded by the high wall of the Santé prison. This spot, usually
deserted, was crowded with people; a moving mob, swarming
and struggling behind some hastily erected barriers. Charlot<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_287">[287]</a></span>
stretched a trembling hand towards the spectacle, in sudden
comprehension.</p>
<p>"Good heavens!" he cried, "that must be where they are
putting up the scaffold. Yes, I can see the planks and uprights; it
is the guillotine! The exe——"</p>
<p>The old man's words ended in a sudden cry, and almost simultaneously
there was a heavy thud.</p>
<p>Struck from behind, Charlot fell like a log to the floor, while
Lady Beltham recoiled in terror, clenching her fists to prevent
herself from screaming.</p>
<p>Seizing the opportunity presented by Valgrand's faithful servant
standing so still, hypnotised by the gruesome spectacle
being prepared outside, Gurn had drawn a knife from his
pocket, and, springing on the unfortunate old man, had driven
the blade up to the hilt behind his neck.</p>
<p>Charlot fell prone and rigid, the weapon remaining in the
wound and stopping the flow of blood.</p>
<p>Lady Beltham was staring at the victim in horror, but Gurn
seized her roughly by the arm.</p>
<p>Without troubling to alter the appearance of his face, but horrified
as she was by the tragedies which had succeeded one another
in such appalling and rapid succession during this awful
night, Gurn drew the half-fainting woman to him, and hurried
her away.</p>
<p>"Come quick!" he muttered hoarsely. "Let us get out of this!"</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/><p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_288">[288]</a></span></p>
<h2> <span class="smcap">XXXII. On the Scaffold</span></h2>
<p>It was still dark.</p>
<p>In the keen morning air a crowd came hurrying along the
pavements, flowing over into the roadways. The boulevards
were black with people, all marching briskly towards one common
goal. And it was a light-hearted, singing crowd, chanting
the choruses of popular songs and swarming into the open
restaurants and wine-shops and drinking dens.</p>
<p>And it was noticeable that all these late birds belonged to one
of two sharply divided classes. They were either rich, or miserably
poor; they either came from the night clubs, or they were
the poor devils with no homes or hearths who roam about the
city from one year's end to another. There were crooks whose
faces shone with the evil excitement of alcohol, out-of-works of
all kinds, beggars, and young men—all young men—with sleek
oiled hair and shiny boots, in whose eyes and demeanour theft
and crime could be seen.</p>
<p>By a curious coincidence the great news seemed to have
reached all, toffs and crooks alike, at exactly the same time.
About midnight the rumour had run round the town; it was certain,
definite this time; the official steps had been taken, and the
guillotine was going to raise her blood-stained arms towards the
sky; at earliest dawn, Gurn, the man who had murdered Lord
Beltham, was to undergo the supreme punishment, and expiate
his murder with his life.</p>
<p>No sooner had the great news become known than all prepared,
as for a holiday, to go to see the man's head fall. At
Montmartre carriages were requisitioned and taxi-cabs were at<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_289">[289]</a></span>
a premium. Women in gorgeous toilets and sparkling with jewels
streamed from the open doors into the carriages which
should bear them swiftly towards the Santé prison, and the
place of execution. In the faubourgs likewise, the bars were
emptied of their customers, and men and women, linked arm-in-arm,
set forth on foot, with songs and ribaldries upon their
lips, for the spectacle of blood and the boulevard Arago.</p>
<p>Around the Santé prison an atmosphere of pleasure reigned
as the people, massed together in tight ranks, produced bottles
of wine, and ate sausages, and gaily enjoyed an improvised supper
in the open air, while speculating about the details of the
sight they had come to see. And so the crowd amused itself, for
Gurn's head was going to fall.</p>
<p>Worming his way through the crowd, François Bonbonne, the
landlord of the Saint-Anthony's Pig, led a little company of
friends who took advantage of his great stature to find the best
path to take.</p>
<p>The landlord was half-drunk already in honour of the occasion.</p>
<p>"Come along, Billy Tom," he shouted. "Catch hold of the tail
of my coat and then you won't lose us. Where is Hogshead
Geoffroy?"</p>
<p>"He's coming along with Bouzille."</p>
<p>"Good! Just fancy if Bouzille had tried to get through here
with his train! There are some people about, eh?"</p>
<p>Two men passed the landlord of the market inn just then.</p>
<p>"Come along," said one of them, and as the other caught him
up, Juve added: "Didn't you recognise those fellows?"</p>
<p>"No," said Fandor.</p>
<p>Juve told him the names of the men whom they had passed.</p>
<p>"You will understand that I don't want them to recognise me,"
he said, and as Fandor smiled Juve went on: "It's a queer thing,
but it is always the future customers of the guillotine, apaches
and fellows like that, who make a point of seeing this ghastly
spectacle." The detective stopped and laid a hand upon the journalist's
shoulder. "Wait," he said, "we are right in front now: only
the men who are holding the line are ahead of us. If we want to<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_290">[290]</a></span>
get through and avoid the crush we must make ourselves known
at once. Here is your pass."</p>
<p>Jérôme Fandor took the card which Juve held out to him, and
had got for him as a special favour.</p>
<p>"What do we do now?" he asked.</p>
<p>"Here come the municipal guards," Juve replied; "I can see
their sabres flashing. We will get behind the newspaper kiosks
and let them drive the crowd back, and then we will go through."</p>
<p>Juve had correctly anticipated the manœuvre which the officer
in command of the squadron immediately proceeded to
execute. Grave and imposing, and marvellously mounted on
magnificent horses, a large number of municipal guards had just
arrived on the boulevard Arago, by the side of the Santé prison,
and just where the detective and the journalist were standing. A
sharp order rang out, and the guards deployed fan-wise and, riding
knee to knee, drove the crowd back irresistibly to the end of
the avenue, utterly disregarding the angry murmur of protest,
and the general crushing that ensued.</p>
<p>The municipal guards were followed by troops of infantry,
and these again by gendarmes who, holding hands, moved on all
who by some means or other had managed to worm their way
between the horses of the guards and the infantry, determined
at any cost to keep in the front row of spectators.</p>
<p>Juve and Fandor, armed with their special passes which admitted
them to the enclosure where the guillotine actually
stood, had no difficulty in getting through the triple line. They
found themselves in the centre of a large portion of the boulevard
Arago, entirely clear of spectators, and bounded on one
side by the walls of the prison, and on the other by those of a
convent.</p>
<p>In this clear space about a dozen individuals in black coats
and silk hats were walking about, affecting a complete indifference
to what was going to happen, although really they were
profoundly affected by it.</p>
<p>"Chief detective-inspectors," Juve said, pointing them out:
"my colleagues. Some of yours too: do you see them? Chief reporters
of the big dailies. Are you aware that you are uncom<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_291">[291]</a></span>monly
lucky to have been selected, at your extremely youthful
age, to represent your paper at this lugubrious function?"</p>
<p>Jérôme Fandor made an odd grimace.</p>
<p>"I don't mind admitting to you, Juve, that I am here because
I am like you in wanting to see Gurn's head fall; you have satisfied
me beyond all doubt that Gurn is Fantômas, and I want to
be sure that Fantômas is really dead. But if it were not the execution
of that one particular wretch,—the only thing that can
make society safe,—I should certainly have declined the honour
of reporting this event."</p>
<p>"It upsets you?"</p>
<p>"Yes."</p>
<p>Juve bent his head.</p>
<p>"So it does me! Just think: for more than five years I have
been fighting Fantômas! For more than five years I have believed
in his existence, in spite of all ridicule and sarcasm! For
more than five years I have been working for this wretch's death,
for death is the only thing that can put a stop to his crimes!" Juve
paused a moment, but Fandor made no comment. "And I am
rather sick and sorry, too: because, although I have reached this
certainty that Gurn is Fantômas, and have succeeded in convincing
intelligent people, who were ready to study my work in
good faith, I have nevertheless not succeeded in establishing
legal proof that Gurn is Fantômas. Deibler and the Public
Prosecutor, and people generally, think that it is merely Gurn
who is going to be decapitated now. I may have secured this
man's condemnation, but none the less he has beaten me and
deprived me of the satisfaction of having brought him,
Fantômas, to the scaffold! I have only consigned Gurn to the
scaffold, and that is a defeat!"</p>
<p>The detective stopped. From the boulevard Arago, from the
end to which the crowd had been driven back, cheers and applause
and joyous shouts broke out; it was the mob welcoming
the arrival of the guillotine.</p>
<p>Drawn by an old white horse, a heavy black van arrived at a
fast trot, escorted by four mounted police with drawn swords.
The van stopped a few yards from Juve and Fandor; the police<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_292">[292]</a></span>
rode off, and a shabby brougham came into view, from which
three men in black proceeded to get out.</p>
<p>"Monsieur de Paris and his assistants," Juve informed Fandor:
"Deibler and his men." Fandor shivered, and Juve went on with
his explanations. "That van contains the timbers and the knife.
Deibler and his men will get the guillotine up in half an hour,
and in an hour at the outside, Fantômas will be no more!"</p>
<p>While the detective was speaking, the executioner had
stepped briskly to the officer in charge of the proceedings and
exchanged a few words with him. He signified his approval of
the arrangements made, saluted the superintendent of police of
that division, and turned to his men.</p>
<p>"Come along, lads; get to work!" He caught sight of Juve and
shook hands with him. "Good morning," he said, adding, as
though his work were of the most commonplace kind: "Excuse
me: we are a bit late this morning!"</p>
<p>The assistants took from the van some long cases, wrapped in
grey canvas and apparently very heavy. They laid these on the
ground with the utmost care: they were the timbers and frame
of the guillotine, and must not be warped or strained, for the
guillotine is a nicely accurate machine!</p>
<p>They swept the ground thoroughly, careful to remove any
gravel which might have affected the equilibrium of the framework,
and then set up the red uprights of the scaffold. The floor
timbers fitted one into another and were joined by stout metal
clamps fastened together by a bolt; next the men set the grooved
slides, down which the knife must fall, into holes cut for the purpose
in the middle of the floor. The guillotine now raised its
awful arms to the sky.</p>
<p>Hitherto Deibler had merely watched his men at work. Now
he took a hand himself.</p>
<p>With a spirit-level he ascertained that the floor was absolutely
horizontal; next he arranged the two pieces of wood, from each
of which a segment is cut so as to form the lunette into which
the victim's neck is thrust; then he tested the lever, to make sure
that it worked freely, and gave a curt order.</p>
<p>"The knife!"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_293">[293]</a></span></p>
<p>One of the assistants brought a case which Deibler opened,
and Fandor instinctively shrank as a flash from the bright steel
fell full in his eyes, that sinister triangular knife that presently
would do the work of death.</p>
<p>Deibler leant calmly against the guillotine, fitted the shank
into the grooves in the two uprights, and, setting the mechanism
to work, hoisted up the knife which glittered strangely; he
looked the whole thing over and turned again to his assistants.</p>
<p>"The hay!"</p>
<p>A truss was arranged in the lunette, and Deibler came up to
the instrument and pressed a spring. Like a flash the knife
dropped down the uprights and severed the truss in two.</p>
<p>The rehearsal was finished. Now for the real drama!</p>
<p>While the guillotine was being set up Juve had stood by
Fandor nervously chewing cigarettes.</p>
<p>"Everything is ready now," he said to the lad. "Deibler has
only got to put on his coat and take delivery of Fantômas."</p>
<p>The assistants had just arranged two baskets filled with bran
along each side of the machine; one was destined to receive the
severed head, the other the body when that was released from
the plyer. The executioner pulled on his coat, rubbed his hands
mechanically, and then strode towards a group of officials who
had arrived while the guillotine was being erected, and were
now standing by the entrance to the prison.</p>
<p>"Gentlemen," said Deibler, "it will be sunrise in a quarter of
an hour. We can proceed to awaken the prisoner."</p>
<p>Slowly, in single file, the officials went inside the prison.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>There were present the Attorney General, the Public
Prosecutor, his deputy, the Governor of the prison, and behind
these, M. Havard, Deibler, and his two assistants.</p>
<p>The little company passed through the corridors to the third
floor, where the condemned cells are.</p>
<p>The warder Nibet came forward with his bunch of keys in his
hand.</p>
<p>Deibler looked at the Public Prosecutor.</p>
<p>"Are you ready, sir?" and as that gentleman, who was very<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_294">[294]</a></span>
white, made a sign of assent, Deibler looked at the Governor of
the prison.</p>
<p>"Unlock the cell," the Governor ordered.</p>
<p>Nibet turned the key noiselessly and pushed open the door.</p>
<p>The Public Prosecutor stepped forward. He had hoped to
find the condemned man asleep, and so have had a moment's
respite before announcing the fatal news. But he drew back; for
the man was awake and dressed, sitting ready on his bed with
mad, haggard eyes.</p>
<p>"Gurn," said the Public Prosecutor. "Be brave! Your appeal
has been rejected!"</p>
<p>The others, standing behind him, were all silent, and the
words of the Public Prosecutor fell like a knell. The condemned
man, however, had not stirred, had not even seemed to understand:
his attitude was that of a man in a state of somnambulism.
The Public Prosecutor was surprised by this strange impassivity
and spoke again, in strangled tones.</p>
<p>"Be brave! Be brave!"</p>
<p>A spasm crossed the face of the condemned man, and his lips
moved as though he were making an effort to say something.</p>
<p>"I'm not——" he murmured.</p>
<p>But Deibler laid his hands upon the man's shoulders and cut
the horrid moment short.</p>
<p>"Come now!"</p>
<p>The chaplain came forward in his turn.</p>
<p>"Pray, my brother," he said; "do you wish to hear mass?"</p>
<p>At the touch of the executioner the prisoner had trembled; he
rose, like an automaton, with dilated eyes and twitching face. He
understood what the chaplain said and took a step towards him.</p>
<p>"I—not——"</p>
<p>M. Havard intervened, and spoke to the chaplain.</p>
<p>"Really, sir, no: it is time."</p>
<p>Deibler nodded approval.</p>
<p>"Let us be quick; we can proceed; the sun has risen."</p>
<p>The Public Prosecutor was still bleating "Be brave! Be brave!"</p>
<p>Deibler took the man by one arm, a warder took him by the
other, and between them they half-carried him to the office for<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_295">[295]</a></span>
his last toilette. In the little room, dimly lighted by a winking
lamp, a chair had been set close to a table. The executioner and
his assistant pushed the condemned man into the chair, and
Deibler took up a pair of scissors.</p>
<p>The Public Prosecutor spoke to the prisoner.</p>
<p>"Would you like a glass of rum? Would you like a cigarette? Is
there anything you wish to have done?"</p>
<p>Maître Barberoux, who had not arrived in time for the awakening
of the prisoner, now approached his client; he, too, was
ghastly white.</p>
<p>"Is there anything else that I can do for you? Have you any
last wish?"</p>
<p>The condemned man made another effort to rise from the
chair, and a hoarse groan escaped from his throat.</p>
<p>"I—I——"</p>
<p>The prison doctor had joined the group, and now drew the
Public Prosecutor's deputy aside.</p>
<p>"It is appalling!" he said. "The man has not articulated a single
word since he was awakened. He is as though sunk in a stupefied
sleep. There is a technical word for his condition: he is in
a state of inhibition. He is alive, and yet he is a corpse. Anyhow
he is utterly unconscious, incapable of any clear thought, or of
saying a word that has any sense. I have never seen such complete
stupefaction."</p>
<p>Deibler waved aside the men who were pressing round him.</p>
<p>"Sign the gaol book, please, M. Havard," he said, and while
that gentleman affixed a shaky signature to the warrant authorising
the delivery of Gurn to the public executioner, Deibler
took the scissors and cut a segment out of the prisoner's shirt
and cut off a wisp of hair that grew low down on his neck.
Meanwhile an assistant bound the wrists of the man who was
about to die. Then the executioner looked at his watch and
made a half-bow to the Public Prosecutor.</p>
<p>"Come! Come! It is the time fixed by law!"</p>
<p>Two assistants took the wretch by the shoulders and raised him
up. There was a horrible, deep, unintelligible rattle in his throat.</p>
<p>"I—I——"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_296">[296]</a></span></p>
<p>But no one heard him, and he was dragged away. It was practically
a corpse that the servants of the guillotine bore down to
the boulevard Arago.</p>
<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
<p>Outside, the first rosy tints of early dawn were waking the
birds, and playing on the great triangular knife, drawing gleams
from it. The time was ten minutes past five. And now the
supreme moment was at hand.</p>
<p>The crowd, momentarily growing denser, was crushed behind
the cordon of troops that had difficulty in keeping it at a distance
from the guillotine. The soldiers, unheeding the oaths and
curses and entreaties with which they were assailed, carried out
their orders and permitted no one to take up his stand anywhere
in the near neighbourhood of the guillotine, except the few rare
individuals who had a special pass.</p>
<p>A sudden murmur ran through the crowd. The mounted police,
stationed opposite the guillotine, had just drawn their
sabres. Fandor gripped Juve's hand nervously. The detective was
very pale.</p>
<p>"Let us get over there," he said, and led Fandor just behind
the guillotine, to the side where the severed head would fall into
the basket. "We shall see the poor devil get out of the carriage,
and being fastened on to the bascule, and pulled into the
lunette." He went on talking as if to divert his own mind from
the thing before him. "That's the best place for seeing things: I
stood there when Peugnez was guillotined, a long time ago now,
and I was there again in 1909 when Duchémin, the parricide,
was executed."</p>
<p>But he came to an abrupt stop. From the great door of the
Santé prison a carriage came rapidly out. All heads were uncovered,
all eyes were fixed, and a deep silence fell upon the
crowded boulevard.</p>
<p>The carriage passed the journalist and the detective at a gallop
and pulled up with a jerk just opposite them, on the other
side of the guillotine, and at the very foot of the scaffold. M.
Deibler jumped down from the box, and opening the door at the
back of the vehicle let down the steps. Pale and nervous, the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_297">[297]</a></span>
chaplain got out backwards, hiding the scaffold from the eyes of
the condemned man, whom the assistants managed somehow to
help out of the carriage.</p>
<p>Fandor was shaking with nervousness and muttering to himself.</p>
<p>But things moved quickly now.</p>
<p>The chaplain, still walking backwards, hid the dread vision for
yet a few seconds more, then stepped aside abruptly. The assistants
seized the condemned man, and pushed him on to the bascule.</p>
<p>Juve was watching the unhappy wretch, and could not restrain
a word of admiration.</p>
<p>"That man is a brave man! He has not even turned pale!
Generally condemned men are livid!"</p>
<p>The executioner's assistants had bound the man upon the
plank; it tilted upwards. Deibler grasped the head by the two
ears and pulled it into the lunette, despite one last convulsive
struggle of the victim.</p>
<p>There was a click of a spring, the flash of the falling knife, a
spurt of blood, a dull groan from ten thousand breasts, and the
head rolled into the basket!</p>
<p>But Juve had flung Fandor aside and sprang towards the scaffold.
He thrust the assistants away, and plunging his hands into
the bran that was all soaked with blood, he seized the severed
head by the hair and stared at it.</p>
<p>Horrified by this scandalous action the assistants rushed upon
the detective.</p>
<p>Deibler forced him backwards.</p>
<p>"You must be mad!"</p>
<p>"Get away!"</p>
<p>Fandor saw that Juve was staggering and seemed about to
swoon. He rushed towards him.</p>
<p>"Good God!" he cried in tones of anguish.</p>
<p>"It isn't Gurn who has just been put to death!" Juve panted
brokenly. "This face has not gone white because it is painted! It
is made up—like an actor's! Oh, curses on him! Fantômas has
escaped! Fantômas has got away! He has had some innocent
man executed in his stead! I tell you Fantômas is alive!"</p>
<div class="transnote">
<a id="Transcribers_Notes"/><h3>Transcriber's Notes</h3>
<p>Page <a href="#Page_25" class="pginternal">25</a>: comma added after "why" ("Why, the park enclosure
has been altered")</p>
<p>Page <a href="#Page_136" class="pginternal">136</a>: taper amended to tapered ("long, tapered fingers")</p>
<p>Page <a href="#Page_265" class="pginternal">265</a>: Treteau <i>sic</i></p>
<p>Accents have been standardised.</p>
<p>Hyphenation has generally been standardized. However, when
a word appears hyphenated and unhyphenated an equal number
of times, both versions have been retained
(maidservants/maid-servants).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
