<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Court of Assize</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“Call Lady Beltham!”</p>
			<p>It was a perfect May day, and everyone who could pretend, on any conceivable ground, to belong to “Paris” had schemed and intrigued to obtain admission to a trial over which public opinion had been excited for months: the trial of Gurn for the murder of Lord Beltham, ex-Ambassador and foremost man of fashion, whose murder, two years before, had caused a great sensation.</p>
			<p>The preliminary formalities of the trial had furnished nothing to tickle the palates of the sensation-loving crowd. The indictment had been almost inaudible, and, besides, it contained nothing that had not already been made public by the Press. Nor had the examination of the prisoner been any more interesting; Gurn sat, strangely impassive, in the dock between two municipal guards, and hardly listened to his counsel, the eminent Maître Barberoux, who was assisted by a galaxy of juniors, including young Roger de Seras. Moreover, Gurn had frankly confessed his guilt almost immediately after his arrest. There was not much for him to add to what he had said before, although the President of the Court pressed him as to some points which were still not satisfactorily clear with respect to his own identity, and the motives which had prompted him to commit his crime, and, subsequently, to pay that most risky visit to Lady Beltham, at the close of which Juve had effected his arrest.</p>
			<p>But Lady Beltham’s evidence promised to be much more interesting. Rumour had been busy for a long time with the great lady and her feelings, and odd stories were being whispered.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_248">[248]</a></span> She was said to be beautiful, wealthy and charitable; people said, under their breath, that she must know a good deal about the murder of her spouse, and when she made her appearance in the box a sudden hush fell upon the crowded court. She was, indeed, a most appealing figure, robed in long black weeds, young, graceful, and very pale, so sympathetic a figure that scandal was forgotten in the general tense desire to hear her answers to the President of the Court.</p>
			<p>Following the usher to the witness-box, she took off her gloves as desired, and, in a voice that trembled slightly but was beautifully modulated, repeated the words of the oath, with her right hand raised the while. Noticing her agitation, the President mitigated somewhat the harshness of the tone in which he generally spoke to witnesses.</p>
			<p>“Pray compose yourself, madame. I am sorry to be obliged to subject you to this examination, but the interests of Justice require it. Come now: you are Lady Beltham, widow of the late Lord Beltham, of English nationality, residing in Paris, at your own house in Neuilly?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Will you kindly turn round, madame, and tell me if you know the prisoner in the dock?”</p>
			<p>Lady Beltham obeyed mechanically; she glanced at Gurn, who paled a little, and answered the President.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I know the prisoner; his name is Gurn.”</p>
			<p>“Very good, madame. Can you tell me first of all how you came to be acquainted with him?”</p>
			<p>“When my husband was in South Africa, at the time of the Boer War, Gurn was a sergeant in the regular army. It was then that I first met him.”</p>
			<p>“Did you know him well at that time?”</p>
			<p>Lady Beltham seemed to be unable to prevent herself from casting long glances at the prisoner; she appeared to be almost hypnotised and frightened by his close proximity.</p>
			<p>“I saw very little of Gurn in the Transvaal,” she answered. “It was just by chance that I learned his name, but of course the difference between his own rank and my husband’s position made<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_249">[249]</a></span> the relations that I could have with a mere sergeant very limited indeed.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Gurn was a sergeant,” the President said. “And after the war, madame, did you see the prisoner again?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, immediately after the war; my husband and I went to England by the same boat on which Gurn went home.”</p>
			<p>“Did you see much of him on board?”</p>
			<p>“No; we were first-class passengers, and he, I believe, went second. It was just by accident that my husband caught sight of him soon after the boat sailed.”</p>
			<p>The President paused and made a note.</p>
			<p>“Were those all the relations your husband had with the prisoner?”</p>
			<p>“They are at any rate all the relations I had with him,” Lady Beltham replied in tones of some distress; “but I know that my husband employed Gurn on several occasions, to help him in various affairs and matters of business.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” said the President; “we will return to that point presently. Meanwhile there is one question I should like to ask you. If you had met the prisoner in the street a few months ago, should you have recognised him? Was his face still distinct in your memory, or had it become blurred and vague?”</p>
			<p>Lady Beltham hesitated, then answered confidently.</p>
			<p>“I am sure I should not have recognised him; and some proof of this is, that just before his arrest was effected I was conversing with the prisoner for several minutes, without having the faintest idea that the poor man with whom I imagined I had to do was no other than the man Gurn for whom the police were looking.”</p>
			<p>The President nodded, and Maître Barberoux leaned forward and spoke eagerly to his client in the dock. But the President continued immediately.</p>
			<p>“You must forgive me, madame, for putting a question that may seem rather brutal, and also for reminding you of your oath to tell us the entire truth. Did you love your husband?”</p>
			<p>Lady Beltham quivered and was silent for a moment, as though endeavouring to frame a right answer.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_250">[250]</a></span></p>
			<p>“Lord Beltham was much older than myself⁠—,” she began, and then, perceiving the meaning implicit in her words, she added: “I had the very highest esteem for him, and a very real affection.”</p>
			<p>A cynical smile curled the lip of the President, and he glanced at the jury as though asking them to pay still closer attention.</p>
			<p>“Do you know why I put that question to you?” he asked, and as Lady Beltham confessed her ignorance he went on: “It has been suggested, madame, by a rumour which is very generally current in the newspapers and among people generally, that the prisoner may possibly have been greatly enamoured of you: that perhaps⁠—well, is there any truth in this?”</p>
			<p>As he spoke the President bent forward, and his eyes seemed to pierce right through Lady Beltham.</p>
			<p>“It is a wicked calumny,” she protested, turning very pale.</p>
			<p>Throughout the proceedings Gurn had been sitting in an attitude of absolute indifference, almost of scorn; but now he rose to his feet and uttered a defiant protest.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” he said to the President of the Court, “I desire to say publicly here that I have the most profound and unalterable respect for Lady Beltham. Anyone who has given currency to the malignant rumour you refer to, is a liar. I have confessed that I killed Lord Beltham, and I do not retract that confession, but I never made any attempt upon his honour, and no word, nor look, nor deed has ever passed between Lady Beltham and myself, that might not have passed before Lord Beltham’s own eyes.”</p>
			<p>The President looked sharply at the prisoner.</p>
			<p>“Then tell me what your motive was in murdering your victim.”</p>
			<p>“I have told you already! Lady Beltham is not to be implicated in my deed in any way! I had constant business dealings with Lord Beltham; I asked him, over the telephone, to come to my place one day. He came. We had an animated discussion; he got warm and I answered angrily; then I lost control of myself and in a moment of madness I killed him! I am profoundly sorry for my crime and stoop to crave pardon for it; but I cannot tolerate<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_251">[251]</a></span> the suggestion that the murder I committed was in the remotest way due to sentimental relations with a lady who is, I repeat, entitled to the very highest respect from the whole world.”</p>
			<p>A murmur of sympathy ran through the court at this chivalrous declaration, by which the jury, who had not missed a word, seemed to be entirely convinced. But the President was trained to track truth in detail, and he turned again to Lady Beltham who still stood in the witness-box, very pale, and swaying with distress.</p>
			<p>“You must forgive me if I attach no importance to a mere assertion, madame. The existence of some relations between yourself and the prisoner, which delicacy would prompt him to conceal, and honour would compel you to deny, would alter the whole aspect of this case.” He turned to the usher. “Recall Mme. Doulenques, please.”</p>
			<p>Mme. Doulenques considered it a tremendous honour to be called as witness in a trial with which the press was ringing, and was particularly excited because she had just been requested to pose for her photograph by a representative of her own favourite paper. She followed the usher to where Lady Beltham stood.</p>
			<p>“You told us just now, Mme. Doulenques,” the President said suavely, “that your lodger, Gurn, often received visits from a lady friend. You also said that if this lady were placed before you, you would certainly recognise her. Now will you kindly look at the lady in the box: is this the same person?”</p>
			<p>Mme. Doulenques, crimson with excitement, and nervously twisting in her hands a huge pair of white gloves which she had bought for this occasion, looked curiously at Lady Beltham.</p>
			<p>“Upon my word I can’t be sure that this is the lady,” she said after quite a long pause.</p>
			<p>“But you were so certain of your facts just now,” the President smiled encouragingly.</p>
			<p>“But I can’t see the lady very well, with all those veils on,” Mme. Doulenques protested.</p>
			<p>Lady Beltham did not wait for the request which the President would inevitably have made, but haughtily put back her veil.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_252">[252]</a></span></p>
			<p>“Do you recognise me now?” she said coldly.</p>
			<p>The scorn in her tone upset Mme. Doulenques. She looked again at Lady Beltham and turned instinctively as if to ask enlightenment from Gurn, whose face, however, was expressionless, and then replied:</p>
			<p>“It’s just what I told you before, your worship: I can’t be sure; I couldn’t swear to it.”</p>
			<p>“But you think she is?”</p>
			<p>“You know, your worship,” Mme. Doulenques protested, “I took an oath just now to tell the truth, and nothing but the truth; so I don’t want to tell any stories; well, this lady might be the same lady, and again she mightn’t be.”</p>
			<p>“In other words, you cannot give a definite answer.”</p>
			<p>“That’s it,” said the concierge. “I don’t know; I can’t swear. This lady is like the other lady⁠—there’s a sort of family likeness between them⁠—, but at the moment I do not exactly recognise her; it’s much too serious!”</p>
			<p>Mme. Doulenques would willingly have continued to give evidence for ever and a day, but the President cut her short.</p>
			<p>“Very well; thank you,” he said, and dismissed her with the usher, turning again meanwhile to Lady Beltham.</p>
			<p>“Will you kindly tell me now what your personal opinion is as to the relative culpability of the prisoner? Of course you understand that he has confessed to the crime, and your answer will bear chiefly on the motive that may have actuated him.”</p>
			<p>Lady Beltham appeared to have recovered some of her confidence.</p>
			<p>“I cannot say anything definite, can only express a very vague feeling about the matter. I know my husband was quick-tempered, very quick-tempered, and even violent; and his peremptory temper predisposed him to positive convictions. He maintained what he considered his rights at all times and against all comers; if, as the prisoner says, there was a heated discussion, I should not be surprised if my husband did make use of arguments that might have provoked anger.”</p>
			<p>The President gently gave a clearer turn to the phrase she used.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_253">[253]</a></span></p>
			<p>“So, in your opinion, the prisoner’s version of the story is quite permissible? You admit that Lord Beltham and his murderer may have had a heated discussion, as a consequence of which Gurn committed this crime? That is your honest belief?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” Lady Beltham answered, trying to control her voice; “I believe that that may be what took place. And then, it is the only way in which I can find the least excuse for the crime this man Gurn committed.”</p>
			<p>The President picked up the word, in astonishment.</p>
			<p>“Do you want to find excuses for him, madame?”</p>
			<p>Lady Beltham stood erect, and looked at the President.</p>
			<p>“It is written that to pardon is the first duty of good Christians. It is true that I have mourned my husband, but the punishment of his murderer will not dry my tears; I ought to forgive him, bow beneath the burden that is laid upon my soul: and I do forgive him!”</p>
			<p>Ghastly pale, Gurn was staring at Lady Beltham from the dock; and this time his emotion was so visible that all the jury noticed it. The President held a brief colloquy with his colleagues, asked the prisoner’s counsel whether he desired to put any questions to the witness, and, receiving a reply in the negative, dismissed Lady Beltham with a word of thanks, and announced that the Court would adjourn.</p>
			<p>Immediately a hum of conversation broke out in the warm and sunny court; barristers in their robes moved from group to group, criticising, explaining, prophesying; and in their seats the world of beauty and fashion bowed and smiled and gossiped.</p>
			<p>“She’s uncommonly pretty, this Lady Beltham,” one young lawyer said, “and she’s got a way of answering questions without compromising herself, and yet without throwing blame on the prisoner, that is uncommonly clever.”</p>
			<p>“You are all alike, you men,” said a pretty, perfectly dressed woman in mocking tones; “if a woman is young, and hasn’t got a hump on her back, and has a charming voice, your sympathies are with her at once! Oh, yes, they are! Now shall I tell you what your Lady Beltham really is? Well, she is nothing more nor less than a barnstormer! She knew well enough how to get on the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_254">[254]</a></span> soft side of the judge, who was quite ridiculously amiable to her, and to capture the sympathy of the Court. I think it was outrageous to declare that she had married a man who was too old for her, and to say that she felt nothing but esteem for him!”</p>
			<p>“There’s an admission!” the young barrister laughed. “<i>Vive l’amour</i>, eh? And <i>mariages de convenance</i> are played out, eh?”</p>
			<p>On another bench a little further away, a clean-shaven man with a highly intelligent face was talking animatedly.</p>
			<p>“Bosh! Your Lady Beltham is anything you like: what do I care for Lady Beltham? I shall never play women’s parts, shall I? She does not stand for anything. But Gurn, now! There’s a type, if you like! What an interesting, characteristic face! He has the head of the assassin of genius, with perfect mastery of self, implacable, cruel, malignant, a Torquemada of a man!”</p>
			<p>“Your enthusiasm is running away with you,” someone laughed.</p>
			<p>“I don’t care! It is so seldom one comes across figures in a city that really are figures, entities. That man is not an assassin: he is The Assassin⁠—the Type!”</p>
			<p>Two ladies, sitting close to this enthusiast, had been listening keenly to this diatribe.</p>
			<p>“Do you know who that is?” one whispered to the other. “That is Valgrand, the actor,” and they turned their lorgnettes on the actor who was waxing more animated every moment.</p>
			<p>A bell rang, and, heralded by the usher proclaiming silence, the judges returned to the bench and the jury to their box. The President cast an eagle eye over the court, compelling silence, and then resumed the proceedings.</p>
			<p>“Next witness: call M. Juve!”</p>
			<hr style="width: 65%;"/>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_255">[255]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
