<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII: A Dreadful Confession</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">A Dreadful Confession</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>While Juve was devoting his marvellous skill and incomparable daring to the elucidation of the new case with which the Criminal Investigation Department had entrusted him in Paris, things were marching at Beaulieu, where the whole machinery of the law was being set in motion for the discovery and arrest of Charles Rambert.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>With a mighty clatter and racket Bouzille came down the slope and stopped before old mother Chiquard’s cottage. He arrived in his own equipage, and an extraordinary one it was!</p>
			<p>Bouzille was mounted upon a tricycle of prehistoric design, with two large wheels behind and a small steering wheel in front, and a rusty handlebar from which all the plating was worn off. The solid rubber tyres which once had adorned the machine had worn out long ago, and were now replaced by twine twisted round the felloes of the wheels; this was forever fraying away and the wheels were fringed with a veritable lacework of string. Bouzille must have picked up this impossible machine for an old song at some local market, unless perhaps some charitable person gave it to him simply to get rid of it. He styled this tricycle his “engine,” and it was by no means the whole of his equipage. Attached to the tricycle by a stout rope was a kind of wicker perambulator on four wheels, which he called his “sleeping-car,” because he stored away in it all the bits of rag he picked up on his journeys, and also his very primitive bedding and the little piece of waterproof canvas under which he often slept in the open air. Behind the sleeping-car was a third vehicle, the restaurant-car, consisting of an old soap box mounted on four solid wooden wheels, which were fastened to the axles by huge conical bolts; in this he kept his provisions; lumps of bread and fat, bottles and vegetables, all mixed up in agreeable confusion. Bouzille made quite long journeys in this train of his, and was well known throughout the southwest of France. Often did the astonished population see him bent over his tricycle, with his pack on his back, pedalling with extraordinary rapidity down the hills, while the carriages behind him bumped and jumped over the inequalities in the surface of the road until it seemed impossible that they could retain their equilibrium.</p>
			<p>Old mother Chiquard had recognised the cause of the racket. The healthy life of the country had kept the old woman strong and active in spite of the eighty-three years that had passed over her head, and now she came to her door, armed with a broom, and hailed the tramp in angry, threatening tones.</p>
			<p>“So it’s you, is it, you thief, you robber of the poor! It’s shocking, the way you spend your time in evil doing! What do you want now, pray?”</p>
			<p>Slowly and sheepishly and with head bowed, Bouzille approached mother Chiquard, nervously looking out for a whack over the head with the broom the old lady held.</p>
			<p>“Don’t be cross,” he pleaded when he could get in a word; “I want to come to an arrangement with you, mother Chiquard, if it can be done.”</p>
			<p>“That’s all according,” said the old woman, eyeing the tramp with great mistrust; “I haven’t much faith in arrangements with you: rascals like you always manage to do honest folk.”</p>
			<p>Mother Chiquard turned back into her cottage; it was no weather for her to stop out of doors, for a strong north wind was blowing, and that was bad for her rheumatism. Bouzille deliberately followed her inside and closed the door carefully behind him. Without ceremony he walked up to the hearth, where a scanty wood fire was burning, and put down his pack so as to be able to rub his hands more freely.</p>
			<p>“Miserable weather, mother Chiquard!”</p>
			<p>The obstinate old lady stuck to her one idea.</p>
			<p>“If it isn’t miserable to steal my rabbit, this is the finest weather that ever I saw!”</p>
			<p>“You make a lot of fuss about a trifle,” the tramp protested, “especially since you will be a lot the better by the arrangement I’m going to suggest.”</p>
			<p>The notion calmed mother Chiquard a little, and she sat down on a form, while Bouzille took a seat upon the table.</p>
			<p>“What do you mean?” the old woman enquired.</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Bouzille, “I suppose your rabbit would have fetched a couple of shillings in the market; I’ve brought you two fowls that are worth quite eighteen-pence each, and if you will give me some dinner at twelve o’clock I will put in a good morning’s work for you.”</p>
			<p>Mother Chiquard looked at the clock upon the wall; it was eight o’clock. The tramp’s proposal represented four hours’ work, which was not to be despised; but before striking the bargain she insisted on seeing the fowls. These were extracted from the pack; tied together by the feet, and half suffocated, the unfortunate creatures were not much to look at, but they would be cheap, which was worth considering.</p>
			<p>“Where did you get these fowls?” mother Chiquard asked, more as a matter of form than anything else, for she was pretty sure they had not been honestly come by.</p>
			<p>Bouzille put his finger to his lip.</p>
			<p>“Hush!” he murmured gently; “that’s a secret between me and the poultry. Well, is it a go?” and he held out his hand to the old lady.</p>
			<p>She hesitated a moment and then made up her mind.</p>
			<p>“It’s a go,” she said, putting her horny fingers into the man’s hard palm. “You shall chop me some wood first, and then go down to the river for the rushes I have put in to soak; they must be well swollen by this time.”</p>
			<p>Bouzille was glad to have made it up with mother Chiquard, and pleased at the prospect of a good dinner at midday; he opened the cottage door, and leisurely arranged a few logs within range of the axe with which he was going to split them; mother Chiquard began to throw down some grain to the skinny and famished fowls that fluttered round her.</p>
			<p>“I thought you were in prison, Bouzille,” she said, “over stealing my rabbit, and also over that affair at the château of Beaulieu.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, those are two quite different stories,” Bouzille replied. “You mustn’t mix them up together on any account. As for the château job, every tramp in the district has been run in: I was copped by M’sieu Morand the morning after the murder; he took me into the kitchen of the château and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Louise gave me something to eat. There was another chap there with me, a man named François Paul who doesn’t belong to these parts; between you and me, I thought he was an evil-looking customer who might easily have been the murderer, but it doesn’t do to say that sort of thing, and I’m glad I held my tongue because they let him go. I heard no more about it, and five days later I went back to Brives to attend the funeral of the Marquise de Langrune. That was a ceremony if you like! The church all lighted up, and all the nobility from the neighbourhood present. I didn’t lose my time, for I knew all the gentlemen and ladies and took the best part of sixteen shillings, and the blind beggar who sits on the steps of the church called me all the names he could put his tongue to!”</p>
			<p>The tramp’s story interested mother Chiquard mightily, but her former idea still dominated her mind.</p>
			<p>“So they didn’t punish you for stealing my rabbit?”</p>
			<p>“Well, they did and they didn’t,” said Bouzille, scratching his head. “M’sieu Morand, who is an old friend of mine, took me to the lockup at Saint-Jaury, and I was to have gone next morning to the court at Brives, where I know the sentence for stealing domestic animals is three weeks. That would have suited me all right just now, for the prison at Brives is quite new and very comfortable, but that same night Sergeant Doucet shoved another man into the clink with, me at Saint-Jaury, a raving lunatic who started smashing everything up, and tried to tear my eyes out. Naturally, I gave him as good as I got, and the infernal row we made brought in the sergeant. I told him the chap wanted to throttle me, and he was nonplussed, for he couldn’t do anything with the man, who was fairly mad, and couldn’t leave me alone there with him. So at last the sergeant took me to one side and told me to hook it and not let him see me again. So there it is.”</p>
			<p>While he was chattering like this Bouzille had finished the job set him by mother Chiquard, who meanwhile had peeled some potatoes and poured the soup on the bread. He wiped his brow, and seeing the brimming pot, gave a meaning wink and licked his tongue.</p>
			<p>“I’ll make the fire up, mother Chiquard; I’m getting jolly hungry.”</p>
			<p>“So you ought to be, at half-past eleven,” the old woman replied. “Yes, we’ll have dinner, and you can get the rushes out afterwards.”</p>
			<p>Mother Chiquard was the proud freeholder of a little cottage that was separated from the bank of the Dordogne by the high road between Martel and Montvalent. Round the cottage she had a small orchard, and opposite, through a gap in the trees, was a view of the yellow waters of the Dordogne and the chain of hills that stood up on the far side of the river. Living here summer and winter, with her rabbits and her fowls, mother Chiquard earned a little money by making baskets; but she was crippled with rheumatism, and was miserable every time she had to go down to the river to pull out the bundles of rushes that she put there to soak; the work meant not merely an hour’s paddling in mud up to the knees, but also a fortnight’s acute agony and at least a shilling for medicine. So whoever wanted to make a friend of the old woman only had to volunteer to get the rushes out for her.</p>
			<p>As he ate, Bouzille told mother Chiquard of his plans for the coming spring.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” he said, “since I’m not doing any time this winter I’m going to undertake a long journey.” He stopped munching for a second and paused for greater effect. “I am going to Paris, mother Chiquard!” Then, seeing that the old lady was utterly dumbfounded by the announcement, he leant his elbows on the table and looked at her over his empty plate. “I’ve always had one great desire⁠—to see the Eiffel Tower: that idea has been running in my head for the last fifteen years. Well, now I’m going to gratify the wish. I hear you can get a room in Paris for twopence-halfpenny a night, and I can manage that.”</p>
			<p>“How long will it take you to get there?” enquired the old woman, immensely impressed by Bouzille’s venturesome plan.</p>
			<p>“That depends,” said the tramp. “I must allow quite three months with my train. Of course if I got run in on the way for stealing, or as a rogue and vagabond, I couldn’t say how long it would take.”</p>
			<p>The meal was over, and the old woman was quietly washing up her few plates and dishes, when Bouzille, who had gone down to the river to fetch the rushes, suddenly called shrilly to mother Chiquard.</p>
			<p>“Mother Chiquard! Mother Chiquard! Come and look! Just fancy, I’ve earned twenty-five francs!”</p>
			<p>The summons was so urgent, and the news so amazing, that the old lady left her house and hurried across the road to the river bank. She saw the tramp up to his waist in the water, trying, with a long stick, to drag out of the current a large object which was not identifiable at a first glance. To all her enquiries Bouzille answered with the same delighted cry, “I have earned twenty-five francs,” too intent on bringing his fishing job to a successful issue even to turn round. A few minutes later he emerged dripping from the water, towing a large bundle to the safety of the bank. Mother Chiquard drew nearer, greatly interested, and then recoiled with a shriek of horror.</p>
			<p>Bouzille had fished out a corpse!</p>
			<p>It was a ghastly sight: the body of a very young man, almost a boy, with long, slender limbs; the face was so horribly swollen and torn as to be shapeless. One leg was almost entirely torn from the trunk. Through rents in the clothing strips of flesh were trailing, blue and discoloured by their long immersion in the water. On the shoulders and back of the neck were bruises and stains of blood. Bouzille, who was quite unaffected by the ghastliness of the object and still kept up his gay chant “I have fished up a body, I’ve earned twenty-five francs,” observed that there were large splinters of wood, rotten from long immersion, sticking in some of the wounds. He stood up and addressed mother Chiquard who, white as a sheet, was watching him in silence.</p>
			<p>“I see what it is: he must have got caught in some mill wheel: that’s what has cut him up like that.”</p>
			<p>Mother Chiquard shook her head uneasily.</p>
			<p>“Suppose it was a murder! That would be an ugly business!”</p>
			<p>“It’s no good my looking at him any more,” said Bouzille. “I don’t recognise him; he’s not from the country.”</p>
			<p>“That’s sure,” the old woman agreed. “He’s dressed like a gentleman.”</p>
			<p>The two looked at each other in silence. Bouzille was not nearly so complacent as he had been a few minutes before. The reward of twenty-five francs prompted him to go at once to inform the police; the idea of a crime, suggested by the worthy woman, disturbed him greatly, and all the more because he thought it was well founded. Another murder in the neighbourhood would certainly vex the authorities, and put the police in a bad temper. Bouzille knew from experience that the first thing people do after a tragedy is to arrest all the tramps, and that if the police are at all crotchety they always contrive to get the tramps sentenced for something else. He had had a momentary inclination to establish his winter quarters in prison, but since then he had formed the plan of going to Paris, and liberty appealed to him more. He reached a sudden decision.</p>
			<p>“I’ll punt him back into the water!”</p>
			<p>But mother Chiquard stayed him, just as he was putting his idea into execution.</p>
			<p>“You mustn’t: suppose somebody has seen us already? It would land us in no end of trouble!”</p>
			<p>Half an hour later, convinced that it was his melancholy duty, Bouzille left two-thirds of his train in mother Chiquard’s custody, got astride his prehistoric tricycle and slowly pedalled off towards Saint-Jaury.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>New Year’s Day is a melancholy and a tedious one for everybody whose public or private relations do not make it an exceptionally interesting one. There is the alteration in the date, for one thing, which is provocative of thought, and there is the enforced idleness for another, coming upon energetic folk like a temporary paralysis and leaving them nothing but meditation wherewith to employ themselves.</p>
			<p>Juve, comfortably installed in his own private study, was realising this just as evening was falling on this first of January. He was a confirmed bachelor, and for several years had lived in a little flat on the fifth floor of an old house in the rue Bonaparte. He had not gone out today, but though he was resting he was not idle. For a whole month past he had been wholly engrossed in his attempt to solve the mystery surrounding the two cases on which he was engaged, the Beltham case, and the Langrune case, and his mind was leisurely revolving round them now as he sat in his warm room before a blazing wood fire, and watched the blue smoke curl up in rings towards the ceiling. The two cases were very dissimilar, and yet his detective instinct persuaded him that although they differed in details their conception and execution emanated not only from one single brain but also from one hand. He was convinced that he was dealing with a mysterious and dangerous individual, and that while he himself was out in the open he was fighting a concealed and invisible adversary; he strove to give form and substance to the adversary, and the name of Fantômas came into his mind. Fantômas! What might Fantômas be doing now, and, if he had a real existence, as the detective most firmly believed, how was he spending New Year’s Day?</p>
			<p>A sharp ring at the bell startled him from his chair, and not giving his manservant time to answer it, he went himself to the door and took from a messenger a telegram which he hastily tore open and read:</p>
			<p>“Have found in the Dordogne drowned body of young man, face unrecognisable, from description possibly Charles Rambert. Please consider situation and wire course you will take.”</p>
			<p>The telegram had been handed in at Brives and was signed by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Presles.</p>
			<p>“Something fresh at last,” the detective muttered. “Drowned in the Dordogne, and face unrecognisable! I wonder if it really is Charles Rambert?”</p>
			<p>Since <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Etienne Rambert and his son had disappeared so unaccountably, the detective naturally had formulated mentally several hypotheses, but he had arrived at no conclusion which really satisfied his judgment. But though their flight had not surprised him greatly, he had been rather surprised that the police had not been able to find any trace of them, for rightly or wrongly Juve credited them with a good deal of cleverness and power. So it was by no means unreasonable to accept the death of the fugitives as explanation of the failure of the police to find them. However, this was a fresh development of the case, and he was about to draft a reply to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Presles when once more the bell rang sharply.</p>
			<p>This time Juve did not move, but listened while his man spoke to the visitor. It was an absolute rule of Juve’s never to receive visitors at his flat. If anyone wanted to see him on business, he was to be found almost every day in his office at headquarters about eleven in the morning; to a few people he was willing to give appointments at a quiet and discreet little café in the boulevard Saint-Michel; but he invited no one to his own rooms except one or two of his own relations from the country, and even they had to be provided with a password before they could obtain admission. So now, to all the entreaties of the caller, Juve’s servant stolidly replied with the assurance that his master would see no one; yet the visitor’s insistence was so great that at last the servant was prevailed upon to bring in his card, albeit with some fear as to the consequences for himself. But to his extreme relief and surprise, Juve, when he had read the name engraved upon the card, said sharply:</p>
			<p>“Bring him in here at once!”</p>
			<p>And in another couple of seconds <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Etienne Rambert was in the room!</p>
			<p>The old gentleman who had fled so mysteriously a few days before, taking with him the son over whom so dread a charge was hanging, bowed deferentially to the detective, with the pitiful mien of one who is crushed beneath the burden of misfortune. His features were drawn, his face bore the stamp of deepest grief, and in his hand he held an evening paper, which in his agitation he had crumpled almost into a ball.</p>
			<p>“Tell me, sir, if it is true,” he said in low trembling tones. “I have just read that.”</p>
			<p>Juve pointed to a chair, took the paper mechanically, and smoothing it out, read, below a large headline, “Is this a sequel to the Beaulieu Crime?” a story similar to that he had just gathered from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Presles’ telegram.</p>
			<p>Juve contemplated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Etienne Rambert in silence for a few minutes, and then, without replying directly to his visitor’s first question, asked him a question in that quiet voice of his, the wonderful indifferent tonelessness of which concealed the least clue to his inmost thoughts.</p>
			<p>“Why do you come to me, sir?”</p>
			<p>“To find out, sir,” the old man answered.</p>
			<p>“To find out what?”</p>
			<p>“If that poor drowned corpse is⁠—my son’s: is my poor Charles!”</p>
			<p>“It is rather you who can tell me, sir,” said Juve, impassive as ever.</p>
			<p>There was a pause. Despite his emotion, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Rambert seemed to be thinking deeply. Suddenly he appeared to make an important decision, and raising his eyes to the detective he spoke very slowly:</p>
			<p>“Have pity, sir, on a brokenhearted father. Listen to me: I have a dreadful confession to make!”</p>
			<p>Juve drew his chair close to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Etienne Rambert.</p>
			<p>“I am listening,” he said gently, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Etienne Rambert began his “dreadful confession.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
